[Amit Varma]: This episode of The Seen and The Unseen is brought to you by Intel.
[Amit Varma]: In 1890, Lucy Jervis, the wife of Lord Harris, the Governor of Bombay, challenged her husband to a game of cricket.
[Amit Varma]: It took place in the Hill Resort of Mahabaleshwar.
[Amit Varma]: Jervis, or Lady Harris, led a team of 13 women, while her husband's team had the usual 11 men.
[Amit Varma]: A magazine called Cricket carried this account from a correspondent.
[Amit Varma]: Quote, We are all feeling quite exhausted with laughing.
[Amit Varma]: The ladies were most dreadfully in earnest, but so nervous.
[Amit Varma]: Every run, every ball led to a comical situation.
[Amit Varma]: Their nervousness at running, the way they met in the middle of each wicket and consulted as to whether it was safe to go on,
[Amit Varma]: and finally each would run back to her own wicket, the way they threw themselves on the ball in fielding
[Amit Varma]: and had to make a search in their petticoats for it.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: Even at this distance, the condescension, the patronizing tone makes me so mad.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not just a 19th century tone.
[Amit Varma]: You hear it around you today, in private drawing rooms and public social media,
[Amit Varma]: where women's cricket is looked upon as a curiosity.
[Amit Varma]: In recent times, though, there have been stirrings of change.
[Amit Varma]: The excerpt I read out is from a superb book called The Fire Burns Blue,
[Amit Varma]: A History of Women's Cricket in India by Karunia Keshav and the late Siddhant Pattnayak.
[Amit Varma]: And my guest today is someone who's been part of the journey of women's cricket,
[Amit Varma]: both as someone who played for India and as someone who has written with great insight and eloquence about the game.
[Amit Varma]: And she's thrown herself headlong into another movement that I care a lot about,
[Amit Varma]: the one that's happening in the creator economy.
[Amit Varma]: Can someone really be part of two revolutions in one lifetime?
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today is Snehal Pradhan, who has been a fast bowler for the Indian team,
[Amit Varma]: a cricket journalist, a TV commentator, a radio commentator in multiple languages,
[Amit Varma]: a YouTuber and someone who teaches both how to play cricket and how to do multimedia sports journalism.
[Amit Varma]: She may do many things, but she's not a dabbler.
[Amit Varma]: She's one of the best cricket writers in the game today.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, a true all-rounder.
[Amit Varma]: Her reportage can be vivid and evocative.
[Amit Varma]: Her opinion pieces are always clear and incisive.
[Amit Varma]: Very few people can do both so well.
[Amit Varma]: Her understanding of cricket, her mastery of the craft of writing,
[Amit Varma]: and most of all, her work ethic and willingness to learn new forms like YouTubing is crazy.
[Amit Varma]: I'm a Snehal Pradhan fanboy and was delighted when she agreed to come on the show.
[Amit Varma]: Before we begin this conversation, though, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Artificial intelligence seems like such a scary term.
[Amit Varma]: When we look into the future, AI can seem both magical and dystopian.
[Amit Varma]: But it seems that way only till it actually exists.
[Amit Varma]: Everything around us right now, all of the internet and so much outside it, runs on AI.
[Amit Varma]: From maps to social media to the content we consume to the cabs we take to the water we drink.
[Amit Varma]: One of the unseen forces behind this everyday magic is the sponsor of this episode, Intel.
[Amit Varma]: For anyone who wants to harness the power of AI without reinventing the wheel,
[Amit Varma]: Intel has a range of products and solutions.
[Amit Varma]: The 3rd Gen Intel Xeon Scalable processors pack in more power than any other solution
[Amit Varma]: and are insane bang for the buck.
[Amit Varma]: Intel works with various partners to offer AI-based solutions
[Amit Varma]: and Intel's AI even helped improve Washington DC's water distribution.
[Amit Varma]: You may not realize it, but AI is everywhere.
[Amit Varma]: And where there's AI, there's Intel.
[Amit Varma]: So firstly, very kind of you to say that.
[Guest]: Nice to hear, you know, what the life looks like from the outside in.
[Guest]: Growing up, born and brought up in Pune, we used to live in a joint family where I was born
[Guest]: and spent the first 8 years of my life.
[Guest]: So, very lucky to have the kind of upbringing that allowed us both space in terms of physical space.
[Guest]: We had a, our family had a bungalow where it was my grandparents, paternal grandparents,
[Guest]: my grandfather's mother, and my family as in dad, mom, my brother and myself,
[Guest]: my uncle's family, and all of us kind of living in the same joint family setup.
[Guest]: We had a bungalow with a little bit of a garden at the back.
[Guest]: There was a small outhouse which was converted into an office for my grandparents and my dad's work.
[Guest]: And there was this lovely society.
[Guest]: It's a bungalow society which was originally constructed for refugees who came over from Pakistan, Sindhi refugees.
[Guest]: So, it had this beautiful garden called an oval garden.
[Guest]: It was an oval garden where we used to have a lot of space to cycle.
[Guest]: That's where I learned to cycle.
[Guest]: That's where I played cricket, found some empty space, found a few boys playing.
[Guest]: And I joined in, used to pop over to my neighbor's place.
[Guest]: And she had a bunch of older cousins, again joint family, and she was the only girl.
[Guest]: Yeah, the only girl and then all the older cousins and they were always playing cricket.
[Guest]: And so she and I would join in.
[Guest]: That's kind of been a theme whenever there's been a cricket match happening.
[Guest]: Usually, almost, not usually, almost always boys.
[Guest]: And I would just join in as the only girl.
[Guest]: I remember, you know, not being stopped by who was playing in terms of whether it was a boys.
[Guest]: So, not being stopped by gender or not being stopped by class.
[Guest]: I mean, as a small kid, I had no perception of that, I suppose.
[Guest]: The servants kids were playing, I was playing with them.
[Guest]: And then afterwards, I would, you know, bring them all to bring them all home.
[Guest]: And they would sit and they would watch cable TV along with us.
[Guest]: Although they used to always sit a little off to the side, like in the veranda.
[Guest]: But that's a memory that I have.
[Guest]: And I played all sports as a kid.
[Guest]: Soon, when I was like eight years old, in two-thirds standard, I shifted schools.
[Guest]: There was one school where I was not so happy.
[Guest]: We also moved out and started to live separately, my dad, mom and family.
[Guest]: So, therefore, we moved to another place, another home.
[Guest]: I shifted schools.
[Guest]: There also, pretty much every sport I used to play, table tennis, badminton.
[Guest]: And we didn't have much else.
[Guest]: But there was always cricket happening on a Saturday morning on the field.
[Guest]: On the school field.
[Guest]: It was all the school boys who would kind of just come over and play.
[Guest]: And I would just join those games.
[Guest]: I would go there, be the only girl in those games.
[Guest]: That was like completely normal for me.
[Guest]: So, it was in that sense, until that point at least,
[Guest]: very sheltered, normal kind of a bringing.
[Guest]: Exposure to sports was incidental.
[Guest]: But my affinity to sports was probably something that was always there.
[Guest]: My parents tell stories about, you know,
[Guest]: since being able to walk and run, picking up something and swinging it around.
[Guest]: Probably influenced by what I was seeing on TV.
[Guest]: Because someone born in the late 80s,
[Guest]: growing up to cable television, Sachin Tendulkar, Desert Storm, all that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you've described in another interview how
[Amit Varma]: your grandmother was both an MSC and someone who was into sports and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess being from Pune again,
[Amit Varma]: like I spent many years in Pune, you know, through college and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: My wife is from there.
[Amit Varma]: So, I kind of have a sense of that culture where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: learning is venerated and one, learning is venerated.
[Amit Varma]: And two, another interesting thing about Pune, you know,
[Amit Varma]: in contrast to where I was born in the north,
[Amit Varma]: is that women are expected, it's completely normal to go around and do things,
[Amit Varma]: to work for a living.
[Amit Varma]: You will kind of see them everywhere,
[Amit Varma]: which is not as much the case in many other parts of the country.
[Amit Varma]: But given sort of this, these common factors of both, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that respect for education, running in your family,
[Amit Varma]: because you mentioned when your grandmother got her MSC in the 50s,
[Amit Varma]: it was like pretty rare.
[Amit Varma]: And at the same time, the fact that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sports was considered completely normal.
[Amit Varma]: What were your early aspirations like, like as a kid growing up,
[Amit Varma]: what did you think you want to be, if you thought of that at all?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I don't think kids should think too much of these things,
[Amit Varma]: just go through life and enjoy.
[Amit Varma]: But, and at around what point did it become apparent to you that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, I am good at this cricket thing, that I can do this seriously?
[Guest]: So to give you a little bit of the family background
[Guest]: from the education point of view, or, you know,
[Guest]: just in general, what the situation was like,
[Guest]: my grandparents, paternal grandparents in the 1950s,
[Guest]: yeah, 50s had an inter-caste love marriage.
[Guest]: My grandfather got a PhD in marine biology
[Guest]: and my grandmother got an MSC in marine biology.
[Guest]: Both of them met when they were researchers at the Tarapur aquarium.
[Guest]: They were both from Mumbai.
[Guest]: And on my mother's side, my maternal grandmother,
[Guest]: actually, both my maternal grandparents were teachers.
[Guest]: I never knew my maternal grandfather.
[Guest]: He passed away when my mother was very young.
[Guest]: But even his father, I believe, if I'm getting this right,
[Guest]: was like a Pali scholar and had some connection to Harvard.
[Guest]: I think he'd gone there, taught there, something like that.
[Guest]: That is in the family history, which I keep hearing about.
[Guest]: Father's an engineer.
[Guest]: So, yes, both my brothers are engineers.
[Guest]: Both my brothers are educated in terms of, you know,
[Guest]: one has an MBA, one has an MSC.
[Guest]: MSC or MS? MS.
[Guest]: And that's the culture.
[Guest]: So I'm the odd one out. I'm the sports person in the family.
[Guest]: But very much the emphasis was on, you know,
[Guest]: play as much as you want, sure.
[Guest]: But you can do both and you should do both.
[Guest]: And that was ingrained in me from a young age.
[Guest]: So I scored very well in my 10th and 12th.
[Guest]: My grandfather had this deep desire.
[Guest]: And still, yesterday we were chatting at night.
[Guest]: And he's like, Azu nahi, tu engineering kela pai che.
[Guest]: Still, you should go and do engineering.
[Guest]: But at the time, I chose not to do engineering
[Guest]: because just out of 12th and I had been playing cricket for a while.
[Guest]: And I'll come back to that.
[Guest]: But I didn't even give the CET.
[Guest]: I think my batch was the first batch where they had that CET.
[Guest]: And I was so sure that I'm not going to do engineering.
[Guest]: I didn't even give it.
[Guest]: Because I knew that I wanted to study something
[Guest]: which would allow me to pursue cricket.
[Guest]: Because by that time, I knew that I wanted to pursue cricket.
[Guest]: Who knows what it would lead to.
[Guest]: In fact, I was just last week having a dinner with one of my mentors.
[Guest]: And she was recalling this incident where my grandmother,
[Guest]: and this is probably a good time to tell that story,
[Guest]: how I fell into cricket is that, you know,
[Guest]: after having played in these very informal setups,
[Guest]: being the only girl, etc.
[Guest]: There was one time where I went to a cricket ground
[Guest]: and the coach over there told me,
[Guest]: okay, tie your hair inside your hat.
[Guest]: I don't want people outside seeing that there is a girl here.
[Guest]: And having done a little bit of that,
[Guest]: so my grandmother luckily knew that women's cricket existed
[Guest]: because in the same society that I described before
[Guest]: where we used to live together,
[Guest]: a former India captain used to live.
[Guest]: And she knew of them because of having lived in the same society.
[Guest]: And so this former India captain, Shubhangi Kulkarni,
[Guest]: who is a veteran of, you know, not just in cricket,
[Guest]: but also in the administrative sense,
[Guest]: my grandmother tracked her down,
[Guest]: asked her, you know, okay, where can she practice.
[Guest]: She, I think, went and met her, then sent me to meet her.
[Guest]: And then I got the guidance as to
[Guest]: this is where the Maharashtra team practices in Pune.
[Guest]: So I started going to Nehru Stadium,
[Guest]: which is about 5-6 kilometers from where I was staying.
[Guest]: So every morning my dad would get up and drive me there.
[Guest]: And I would take a rickshaw back or something like that.
[Guest]: Later on, I started cycling that distance to and fro,
[Guest]: sometimes twice a day.
[Guest]: But one of the important points here is that
[Guest]: it's so random that I discovered that women's cricket exists.
[Guest]: And there might be so many more talents
[Guest]: who didn't get that opportunity at the right time.
[Guest]: I was probably in 9th standard, 8th or 9th standard,
[Guest]: having, you know, dabbled in all sports,
[Guest]: when I discovered this organized women's cricket.
[Guest]: And I'm physically gifted,
[Guest]: from the athletic point of view, you could say.
[Guest]: I'm 6 feet tall, almost.
[Guest]: Had the frame of an athlete, kind of.
[Guest]: So immediately, despite wanting to,
[Guest]: my aspirations, despite wanting to be a wicketkeeper,
[Guest]: God alone knows why,
[Guest]: I was told, okay, you're nice and tall,
[Guest]: take 20 steps and bowl.
[Guest]: And that's how I kind of became a fast bowler.
[Guest]: Even just thinking, going back to that,
[Guest]: going even further back in time,
[Guest]: I remember as a kid wanting to be an Air Force pilot.
[Guest]: Thinking, wow, that's so cool, you know,
[Guest]: fighter planes and all that.
[Guest]: All those cartoons we were watching,
[Guest]: probably is the reason, you know,
[Guest]: those SWAT cats and stuff that had
[Guest]: really cool missiles and whatnot,
[Guest]: probably influenced more than anything else.
[Guest]: Then went through a non-violent phase and said,
[Guest]: no, no, I don't want to join the Air Force
[Guest]: because it involves killing people and whatnot.
[Guest]: God alone knows what I was watching
[Guest]: and what influenced me for that.
[Guest]: But cricket was kind of a constant.
[Guest]: Around the 9th standard,
[Guest]: I started regularly playing for Maharashtra.
[Guest]: Pretty much graduated from playing
[Guest]: zero organized cricket to
[Guest]: Maharashtra under-16s and Maharashtra senior
[Guest]: and Maharashtra under-19s.
[Guest]: Is that a helicopter?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think there's a helicopter
[Amit Varma]: somewhere above me, but
[Amit Varma]: it won't show up on your tracks.
[Guest]: It's just so random, in Mumbai, a helicopter.
[Amit Varma]: Why can't we have helicopters? Carry on.
[Guest]: I would not be surprised to hear trains,
[Guest]: but helicopters. Okay, anyways.
[Guest]: So that's how I kind of fell into organized cricket.
[Guest]: And I discovered that, yes,
[Guest]: this is something that I'm good enough at
[Guest]: that I can play at the state level straight away.
[Guest]: I mean, to be fair, the competition was very thin.
[Guest]: The number of girls playing cricket,
[Guest]: like we just pointed out, is accidental.
[Guest]: How girls find cricket is accidental.
[Guest]: So the number of girls actually playing cricket is really small.
[Guest]: So most new kids on the block who came in
[Guest]: would, if they were any good,
[Guest]: would walk straight into a state team.
[Guest]: But we had some really good seniors and
[Guest]: they helped set up the journey.
[Guest]: Of course, no coach.
[Guest]: We're just talking about an era where
[Guest]: we did everything ourselves
[Guest]: and we just learned from our seniors.
[Guest]: Including, you know,
[Guest]: rolling the pitch in the morning,
[Guest]: staking out the nets, setting up the entire nets,
[Guest]: paying the groundsmen a little bit to
[Guest]: help us here and there.
[Guest]: That was all done by us.
[Guest]: And that was how the state team practiced in those days.
[Guest]: This is early 2000s,
[Guest]: which is just kind of mind-boggling to think back on now.
[Amit Varma]: I just finished reading
[Amit Varma]: The Fire Burns Blue, the excellent book by
[Amit Varma]: Karunya Keshav and Siddhant Patnaik on women's cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And there was this almost hard-to-believe kind of description of how
[Amit Varma]: in 1997, when the Women's World Cup happened in India,
[Amit Varma]: they actually had to shift the date of the final
[Amit Varma]: because there was a men's India versus New Zealand match
[Amit Varma]: on the same day.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, Doordarshan won't have telecasted.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, they would have telecasted the men's match.
[Amit Varma]: And so, the date for the final had to be shifted.
[Amit Varma]: So, I'm just curious because in those years,
[Amit Varma]: I don't remember getting to see any women's cricket on TV.
[Amit Varma]: It simply wasn't there in my consciousness at all.
[Amit Varma]: So, all these years when as a kid,
[Amit Varma]: you are learning to play and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're playing with the boys out there and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And you're thinking of a life in cricket perhaps.
[Amit Varma]: What are you actually, you know, looking ahead to?
[Amit Varma]: Because a male cricketer, you know,
[Amit Varma]: he's surrounded by cricket. It's all there.
[Amit Varma]: What are you actually looking at?
[Amit Varma]: Is it initially just a thing of,
[Amit Varma]: Oh, I love the sport. I want to do this.
[Amit Varma]: And that's the only thing that drives you.
[Amit Varma]: Or then do you start thinking seriously about
[Amit Varma]: what is the route? What are my chances of making it?
[Amit Varma]: When I get there, what happens?
[Amit Varma]: Do you think about that stuff at all?
[Amit Varma]: Or how did that play out?
[Guest]: So, in terms of what are we kind of building up to,
[Guest]: there was nothing concrete.
[Guest]: We knew that an Indian team existed.
[Guest]: We knew that, you know, okay, you might get to play for India someday.
[Guest]: And that was a dream. That was a definite dream.
[Guest]: A vague dream because we didn't really know how to play for India.
[Guest]: Besides, you know, doing well at the tournaments and what not.
[Guest]: There was no plan.
[Guest]: We had a few seniors around to kind of guide us.
[Guest]: And luckily, we had a few seniors who were playing in the Indian team at that time.
[Guest]: So, they were kind of examples who we could look up to.
[Guest]: Otherwise, the influence of men's cricket was always there.
[Guest]: When, you know, we're turning on any kind of media, men's cricket is around.
[Guest]: There was women's cricket in bits and pieces on TV.
[Guest]: I remember very vividly that 2002 series
[Guest]: where Jhulan Goswami made her debut. That one was on TV.
[Guest]: And seeing her, watching her bowl for the first time on TV
[Guest]: really crystallized that dream.
[Guest]: Okay, yeah, you're thinking, you know, I want to play for India.
[Guest]: What does that look like?
[Guest]: I want to open the bowling with Jhulan Goswami.
[Guest]: That was how the dream was crystallized in my mind.
[Guest]: What is that going to give me in terms of, you know,
[Guest]: a career, a profession, anything like that?
[Guest]: Absolutely no idea.
[Guest]: Absolutely no idea how to even ask that question.
[Guest]: I'm not even sure whether that question could articulate itself in my mind at the time.
[Guest]: Because still in my student years, so,
[Guest]: probably far away from kind of taking a decision on that front.
[Guest]: The emphasis on kind of building education side by side was always there
[Guest]: because there was this understanding that women's cricket does not pay you.
[Guest]: Of course, at the state level, we were earning zero.
[Guest]: At the India level, players who played for India were earning a little bit of money.
[Guest]: This is, of course, pre-BCCI days.
[Guest]: So, women's cricket was administered by the Women's Cricket Association of India.
[Guest]: And I'm sure you've read lots of stories in that book of how things used to be.
[Guest]: But, honestly, only people within the women's cricket circuit could see that,
[Guest]: okay, this is the Indian team and have a vague idea,
[Guest]: okay, if you want to get there, you have to go through these tournaments, etc.
[Guest]: And some of us were lucky enough to have seniors who were actually in the Indian team
[Guest]: or role models like Jhuludi who, you know, I want to be like this.
[Guest]: But, like you said, in the public consciousness,
[Guest]: the Indian women's team hardly existed.
[Guest]: Which is, I mean, a very different scenario from the 1970s and early 80s
[Guest]: when the women's team was, you know, a much larger,
[Guest]: I won't say a big, but a much larger part of the public consciousness and the public conversation.
[Guest]: So, it was kind of up to us to make our own road.
[Guest]: We saw a vague destination and then we were kind of figuring it out on the way.
[Amit Varma]: Just for my listeners, Fireburns Blue is an excellent book
[Amit Varma]: which talks about the journey of women's cricket from the 70s onwards
[Amit Varma]: when it really started and what a lonely journey it was for so many people
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, the kind of struggles that people had to go through.
[Amit Varma]: So, worth reading and just for perspective, like you said, the BCCI took over women's cricket in 2006
[Amit Varma]: and things kind of changed after that, which we'll discuss also.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that I'm curious about and I, you know, remember writing a piece long, long ago
[Amit Varma]: about how commentary, just television commentary, satellite television
[Amit Varma]: changed the way a lot of young players understood the game and therefore grew
[Amit Varma]: because it was listening to commentary on satellite television in the early 90s,
[Amit Varma]: listening to international commentators, especially that you got a sense,
[Amit Varma]: not just of nuances of strategy and tactics, but also the importance of fitness
[Amit Varma]: and the importance of different kinds of work ethic that kind of come into play,
[Amit Varma]: which would have at some level, you know, influenced a generation of players after that.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, there are many more reasons why people are so much fitter
[Amit Varma]: and so much more professional and all of that, but certainly the commentary helped.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, I see that turbocharged today, like in the kind of work that you do.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure a lot of people learn tons of stuff from your commentary and your YouTube videos,
[Amit Varma]: not just because you're explicitly coaching stuff, but just talking about the nuances of the game
[Amit Varma]: is an education in itself for someone who's listening.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, you mentioned elsewhere that in those growing up years,
[Amit Varma]: that listening to that TV commentary kind of made an impact to you.
[Amit Varma]: And you've also just said that you didn't have a coach when you kind of went early in.
[Amit Varma]: So what is that process of then learning to play the game like?
[Amit Varma]: Like at one level, of course, you learn by doing, you do something again and again,
[Amit Varma]: and you kind of figure out what action works best for you and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But at another level, you have this realization from what you see of international cricket
[Amit Varma]: that there are methods and there is a way of thinking and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: but you don't actually have actual human guidance.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that process of learning about the game like for you?
[Guest]: In one word, slow, because, you know, as much as it's absolutely true
[Guest]: that the more you do something, the better you get at it.
[Guest]: The fact is that if you want to move through that learning process fast,
[Guest]: having a guide, having someone to accelerate that process for you is absolutely essential.
[Guest]: In our early years, it was literally our seniors who taught us, you know,
[Guest]: the one, two, three, fours of batting and what to think, how to kind of ask questions,
[Guest]: how to get to know our own action.
[Guest]: Why is this ball going wide? Think about it yourself.
[Guest]: So that was a slow process because obviously these are players who, you know,
[Guest]: are currently in the Indian team or just having been in the Indian team.
[Guest]: They are focused on their own game and it's complete generosity of time, effort
[Guest]: that they are also passing on that knowledge to the younger generation,
[Guest]: which is something which is ingrained in our culture,
[Guest]: especially the cricket culture, the women's cricket culture.
[Guest]: But it's, you know, limited in terms of it's not their job to do it.
[Guest]: It's a coach's job to do it and we didn't really have that structured coaching.
[Guest]: We could watch on TV. I remember having a conversation with Shubhangi Gulkarni.
[Guest]: I used to spend a lot of time sitting in the Sunny Sports Shop.
[Guest]: She runs a sports shop here in Pune, which is quite well known.
[Guest]: And she's, it's literally a cricketer's adda.
[Guest]: There will, at any point of day, be some former cricketer, current cricketer,
[Guest]: either shopping or sitting there and chatting and talking about stuff.
[Guest]: So I picked up a lot from there, picked up a lot from her advice,
[Guest]: which is just watch the game closely, sometimes more than the actual commentary.
[Guest]: I learned from the actions that are happening on the field because with commentary,
[Guest]: you have to kind of be in the moment,
[Guest]: immediately move from the previous ball to the next ball.
[Guest]: Can't deep dive into what's happened, why it's happened,
[Guest]: how you can make it happen for you.
[Guest]: So it's more about just watching and trying to adapt that.
[Guest]: I remember when we first got a sense of, you know,
[Guest]: strong guidance in terms of one of the seniors who played for our team, Amrita Shinde,
[Guest]: who's been another mentor of mine.
[Guest]: When she came into the team and she wasn't playing for Maharashtra,
[Guest]: she was playing for Air India for a few years.
[Guest]: But when the BCCI took over and when Air India team disbanded
[Guest]: because they didn't find a place in the domestic tournament,
[Guest]: which mirrored the men's tournament,
[Guest]: she came back and a few other senior players who were playing for Air India came back.
[Guest]: And she brought with her, I mean, she just took upon herself to pass on this knowledge to us.
[Guest]: Again, while side by side, trying to resurrect her international career.
[Guest]: And we probably, you know, contributed a lot for that.
[Guest]: She was not able to focus on that. We were all troublesome teenagers.
[Guest]: But she brought a exposure to the international level firstly.
[Guest]: She already played international cricket.
[Guest]: She had been in a professional environment. Air India is a team which employed
[Guest]: women's cricketers on a yearly contract basis.
[Guest]: So they were basically not doing anything else.
[Guest]: They were not studying. They were not side by side working any other jobs.
[Guest]: They were playing cricket all the time.
[Guest]: They had coaches.
[Guest]: They had interaction with not just coaches, but also the best of other international players
[Guest]: because the Air India team at the time was Jhulang Goswami, Anjum Chopra,
[Guest]: Anju Jain, Karuna Jain, Jaya Sharma. No, not Jaya Sharma.
[Guest]: But, you know, all these kind of players.
[Guest]: So that entire knowledge factory she brought back
[Guest]: and revolutionized the kind of way we used to train.
[Guest]: Revolutionized the drills we used to do.
[Guest]: Just made us think in a very different way about how we should be approaching regular nets.
[Guest]: And the result of the performance was outstanding.
[Guest]: I mean, in that first, I think in the first three years after the BCCI took over,
[Guest]: Maharashtra reached three finals.
[Guest]: And yes, I mean, it was great that we had three really good players coming back from Air India.
[Guest]: But it was the younger lot. It was my generation.
[Guest]: And we were like literally 19-20 year olds who were pushing and helping the state team perform.
[Guest]: Because of this guidance that we were suddenly receiving.
[Guest]: So how much of a difference it can make.
[Guest]: You know, you can watch as much as you want and absorb and try it out yourself.
[Guest]: But having someone being able to accelerate that process is just invaluable in cricket.
[Guest]: And which is why, I mean, coaching is something that I stress on a lot now in my current role.
[Guest]: But back then, if you ask the moment when our cricket really transformed.
[Guest]: From, you know, kids who were just trying to figure it out
[Guest]: to having someone who knew the ropes show us the ropes was, it was a big moment.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, in fact, you have a pretty moving video about how one of your regrets was that
[Amit Varma]: there were these 3-4 years where, you know, before she shifted back to playing for Maharashtra from Air India.
[Amit Varma]: Where you kept thinking, should I approach her for tape?
[Amit Varma]: Should I take her help? Should I try to train with her?
[Amit Varma]: And you were just hesitant and you didn't do it.
[Amit Varma]: And later you regretted it because you thought, my God, if I'd learnt all of this a little earlier.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give me some concrete examples of specific ways in which she sort of helped your cricket
[Amit Varma]: both in terms of, you know, the actual game itself and also the mindset which you mentioned?
[Guest]: Yeah, absolutely. So, firstly, in terms of our preparation,
[Guest]: just the physical preparation was what she emphasised on so much
[Guest]: that we have to be at a level of fitness that allows us to perform.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, the skill is just not going to come out.
[Guest]: So, our net sessions were preceded by an hour of fielding and fitness drills.
[Guest]: And she would build fielding into our fitness drills.
[Guest]: Something she is very well known for is the ladder drill.
[Guest]: And that kind of became what our team was known for, you know, the team that carries around the ladder.
[Guest]: And we were the only team that was doing it at the time.
[Guest]: Now, you know, it's just so common that shows how ahead of her time she was.
[Guest]: Just the extent to which she would push us in terms of our strength training.
[Guest]: Of course, no gym. We had absolutely zero gym access.
[Guest]: It was just basic push-ups, squats, bodyweight training.
[Guest]: But the amount of repetitions that she made us do, we had never imagined.
[Guest]: Oh my God! It can be this much?
[Guest]: And I remember watching her herself.
[Guest]: I mean, she is this well-known on the women's cricket circuit
[Guest]: when she was playing as this incredibly fit cricketer.
[Guest]: Her fielding is really well-known.
[Guest]: Her short catching in terms of close-in catching, short leg silly point is really well-known.
[Guest]: And she was the kind of player who, you know, back in 2005-2006 as a woman cricketer
[Guest]: was able to do those push-up and clap.
[Guest]: You know, the ones where you press down, you push up, you are in the air, you clap
[Guest]: and then you come back and push down again.
[Guest]: She was able to do that.
[Guest]: And we were like, oh my God! How are you able to do that?
[Guest]: And then she was trying to pass on the processes of, you know,
[Guest]: how much you have to start, how many push-ups you have to do.
[Guest]: And without actually telling us, she was just building it into our warm-ups.
[Guest]: I remember the first tournament we had when we went to...
[Guest]: First tournament we had under the BCCI auspices when she had joined the team.
[Guest]: We were travelling to Mumbai and the tournament was in Mumbai.
[Guest]: And during that bus journey, everyone was sleeping, listening to music, chatting.
[Guest]: She was sitting at the back of the bus, one by one calling each member of the team behind
[Guest]: and telling them, this is what your job is.
[Guest]: I remember having that conversation with her.
[Guest]: She was like, no variations. Just bowl the ball in one place.
[Guest]: I was like, okay.
[Guest]: And now it's so common. This is called role clarity, which, you know, every T20 team talks about.
[Guest]: 2006, we've never had this kind of role clarity before.
[Guest]: It's just a half an hour team meeting where, yes, do your best and bowl here, bowl there.
[Guest]: What to do, what not to do. Nothing like that.
[Guest]: So, in terms of the mindset, everyone was given a very clear, specific role
[Guest]: as this is what the expectations are.
[Guest]: So, that setting of expectations and then measuring against those expectations was fantastic.
[Guest]: She would constantly keep reminding me about, you know, how fearsome I could be as a bowler.
[Guest]: Because, like I said, very rare for women to be so tall and, you know, generate the kind of bounce that I did.
[Guest]: So, she's like, why are you bowling with a mid-off?
[Guest]: You don't need a mid-off.
[Guest]: You just put a fielder there in front of the batter's face and you bowl.
[Guest]: That's the kind of... and I was like, how can I bowl without a mid-off?
[Guest]: I mean, in my cricketing years, I was... even, you know, towards the later half of my cricketing years,
[Guest]: I was this person with that hesitancy and that uncertainty was a part of my personality.
[Guest]: And she was constantly reinforcing that this is something that you can overcome
[Guest]: and kind of think bigger about yourself.
[Guest]: And this is the potential that you have.
[Guest]: And we were slowly, slowly, slowly growing into the possibility that, okay, she might be right.
[Guest]: That's kind of so mind-blowing and sounds so ahead of her time.
[Amit Varma]: But where did she get all this dope from?
[Amit Varma]: Because I'm assuming that when she came into sort of playing for the state and all that,
[Amit Varma]: there were still no coaches around, obviously, because this was before your time.
[Amit Varma]: So, is this stuff that she started picking up when she got to the national team or playing internationally?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it just a remarkably smart and enterprising person who, you know, figures it out from here and there?
[Guest]: She's gonna hate me for talking so much about her and, you know, even saying that you should have her on your podcast.
[Guest]: But she's this very reserved person, very private person.
[Guest]: And I actually don't even know whether I should be saying all this about her.
[Guest]: But she is someone who learned a lot from observing others.
[Guest]: Very quickly, she was born in Kolhapur, moved to Pune because she was a talented cricketer at a very young age.
[Guest]: And I remember her telling me that she spent, there was a camp at maybe Pune club or some other ground in Pune,
[Guest]: where Frank Tyson had come down and he was training, I think, a bunch of boys.
[Guest]: And she joined in and, you know, aced the fitness test, sometimes even beating the boys.
[Guest]: So, she was always kind of exposing herself to these kind of environments where she will be able to pick up so many things.
[Guest]: I remember her and our other senior cricketers like Kalyani, Umbrani,
[Guest]: they were regularly training with Maharashtra Ranji cricketers, the Rishikesh Kanitkars, who are based in Pune.
[Guest]: And therefore, picking up a lot from them, which is something which doesn't really happen and didn't really happen to my generation.
[Guest]: I had very little contact with the Ranji Trophy cricketers throughout my career.
[Guest]: I still haven't had much contact with the Ranji Trophy cricketers.
[Guest]: I have not set foot or played a game on the Maharashtra stadium at Gahunze just outside of Pune.
[Guest]: It was all kind of very separate in the BCCI times.
[Guest]: But back then, they took the initiative and put themselves in these kind of situations
[Guest]: where they know that they will learn and they will improve as cricketers.
[Guest]: And so, to that extent, that's probably, that's what I know of where she would pick up these things from.
[Guest]: Of course, she's played international cricket.
[Guest]: Not like, you know, someone who's afraid to talk to the opposition, learn from them.
[Guest]: She picked up a lot when she went abroad.
[Guest]: And in fact, people abroad used to watch her train and pick up a lot from her.
[Guest]: Like I said, you know, she's always been the one who's in that kind of situation, but always acing that situation.
[Guest]: But, I mean, to find out really where she picked it up is a really good question.
[Guest]: And I should pick her brain about it at various points.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, hope to see her on your show sometime, actually.
[Amit Varma]: Since you do have a YouTube channel and you're right there in Pune.
[Amit Varma]: You kind of mentioned a bit about how you could sometimes be diffident and lack confidence and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And she told you, no, you've got to be fearsome. You're a six foot fast bowler, you know, and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Do you think that that, you know, the kind of approach that you take to the sport also then changes what you are outside the sport?
[Amit Varma]: Like if you are finding yourself, finding increased confidence within the field and you're being fearsome as it were,
[Amit Varma]: and bowling bouncers and hitting people and all of that, which I presume all fast bowlers enjoy doing.
[Amit Varma]: But did that also rub off then on the kind of person you are?
[Amit Varma]: Because I just find that in any field, not just sort of the sport, but in absolutely any field,
[Amit Varma]: the kind of work you do can often impact the kind of person you become.
[Amit Varma]: You know, like even podcasts, I just find that having these long conversations has kind of changed me a little bit.
[Amit Varma]: Better listener, more empathetic, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, is there something to that, not just from your own experience, but kind of seeing people around you?
[Amit Varma]: I think there's a little bit both ways.
[Guest]: My own experience has, I mean, yes, playing sport and, you know, always being with the only girl in the boys
[Guest]: and never letting it kind of bother me, did probably contribute to the little bit of an extrovertness that I have.
[Guest]: And, you know, the comfort of starting a conversation or being in a situation which might make other people nervous in that sense.
[Guest]: So in that sense, playing sport does help in terms of the person you are and the person you become.
[Guest]: But I mean, there's this old adage in any sport is that, you know, sports doesn't really build character, it reveals it.
[Guest]: So more than anything, I think it's the other way around.
[Guest]: I think the person you are contributes more to the kind of, this is my experience,
[Guest]: the person you are contributes more to the kind of athlete or the kind of sports person you become.
[Guest]: Because you can't, I mean, like sports is, the match is somewhere where it kind of reveals your true personality.
[Guest]: And you can't fake it there.
[Guest]: When you're tired and there is no energy left in your body to put up a pretense,
[Guest]: the only reserves of energy you have are what are going to be used in doing whatever action you need to do.
[Guest]: There, I think it shows who you really are and is an opportunity for reflection and opportunity to learn.
[Guest]: And, you know, for many years, I just went through sport without really actively learning
[Guest]: and without taking those opportunities to really reflect and really think.
[Guest]: Because, like I said, there were a little bit of hesitancies in my personality,
[Guest]: despite on the outside being this super confident, tall, extrovert-ish kind of person
[Guest]: who is, you know, happy to pick up any kind of conversations.
[Guest]: There are always some insecurities that you have, insecurities that you pick up,
[Guest]: which then kind of express themselves on the field.
[Guest]: Because more than anything, I think the person you are contributes in a big way to the athlete you become.
[Guest]: Which is why, you know, having talent is not enough.
[Guest]: Everyone says you have to have the right mindset for it, the right attitude for it.
[Guest]: I think that is a part or that is speaking to this aspect of the conversation
[Guest]: where you have, you know, a person like me can be gifted physically,
[Guest]: but my mindset, was it the best? No.
[Guest]: I mean, was it the best for a professional athlete? No.
[Guest]: Now, looking back, I can be completely honest with myself.
[Guest]: At the time, I hadn't really figured myself out.
[Amit Varma]: In what way was your mindset not up to the task?
[Guest]: So, growing up, there were a few insecurities which were coming out of my childhood.
[Guest]: There were a few body image insecurities which were kind of carrying forth onto the cricket field.
[Guest]: They were all rooted into the sense of, you know, am I good enough?
[Guest]: And rooted into the questions of self-worth.
[Guest]: So, therefore, when there is a situation where you need to make the brave choice,
[Guest]: my internal dialogue was, am I good enough?
[Guest]: And my internal dialogue was that of a doubt.
[Guest]: So, like you mentioned the example of, you know, when I was hesitating
[Guest]: where I could have, should have gone up, had a conversation,
[Guest]: maybe it would have helped my career.
[Guest]: Worst come to worst, it would have just, you know, I would have had to hear a no.
[Guest]: In those moments, I hesitated, doubted myself.
[Guest]: That, as a cricketer, is kind of really, it can be fatal.
[Guest]: Because you are in a situation where the team depends on you.
[Guest]: You are in a situation where you have to perform a difficult task.
[Guest]: It's easy at the start, you know, and the going is good,
[Guest]: the energy levels are high.
[Guest]: But should I bowl that slower ball now?
[Guest]: Oh, what if it gets hit?
[Guest]: Maybe I'll just stick to my regular stock ball.
[Guest]: Should I take a risk and play this shot?
[Guest]: Oh, but what if I get out?
[Guest]: Those are the kind of internal dialogues and internal doubts
[Guest]: that can sometimes come across.
[Guest]: If you have those kind of insecurities and internal dialogues off the field,
[Guest]: if you have those kind of things as a part of your personality, so to speak.
[Guest]: And sure, the process of going through those kind of things, it does help.
[Guest]: But in my opinion, that, and I say this now also to, you know,
[Guest]: younger people in the field, whether it's in media or whether it's in sports,
[Guest]: is that your personal development is probably the biggest obstacle
[Guest]: to your professional development.
[Guest]: And that is kind of my takeaway from the career that I had,
[Guest]: is that if I had, for example, my mindset towards professionalism,
[Guest]: just taking the plunge and being much more professional
[Guest]: about how I saw it was difficult for me
[Guest]: because maybe I was limiting myself with what I could be.
[Guest]: Like my mentors kept telling me, you can aim for this,
[Guest]: you should aim for this.
[Guest]: In my mind, if there is a voice saying,
[Guest]: can I, can I really, can I believe that?
[Guest]: And then only once you believe that,
[Guest]: can you apply the steps required to kind of reach there.
[Guest]: So thinking back now, I mean, at the time I had zero idea.
[Guest]: But thinking back now, I mean, hindsight is a wonderful thing.
[Guest]: That is something I would have encouraged
[Guest]: a 20, 22 year old Snehal Pradhan to change.
[Amit Varma]: I have a tangential question.
[Amit Varma]: I used to play chess a little seriously in my teens.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, I think when I was 19, I just stopped
[Amit Varma]: because I realized I'm not good enough to be an Anand
[Amit Varma]: and anything else just kind of makes no sense.
[Amit Varma]: But just looking back at those days,
[Amit Varma]: I realized that all my issues with why I wasn't able to
[Amit Varma]: take the next step were not talent issues, but temperament issues.
[Amit Varma]: Again, similar things to what you've mentioned,
[Amit Varma]: impatience and always in a hurry and similar to those things.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I wonder that if someone had actually,
[Amit Varma]: if an older me had sat down and told me,
[Amit Varma]: these are your problems, this is how you need to get past it,
[Amit Varma]: this is why it will stop you, whether I would have learned at all.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, whether people just need to make their own mistakes
[Amit Varma]: and go through their own phases and you can't actually teach them.
[Amit Varma]: Like on the one hand, I would imagine that having a mentor
[Amit Varma]: or having a coach can really help you
[Amit Varma]: because you don't make these mistakes you would otherwise have made.
[Amit Varma]: But the other aspect of it is that these mistakes
[Amit Varma]: perhaps come from deep inside, perhaps a part of your character
[Amit Varma]: and you just need to grow on your own.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you're a coach where you're working with young people all the time
[Amit Varma]: and you're seeing kind of similar sort of tendencies.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, would it be the case that like technical defects you can coach out of people,
[Amit Varma]: but just kind of the mentality and all of these other issues.
[Amit Varma]: Is there a way for someone like you to accelerate the growing up process?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, instilling, say, patience or discipline in someone
[Amit Varma]: is not just changing them as a sports person,
[Amit Varma]: but also changing them as a person in a sense.
[Amit Varma]: Can that be accelerated?
[Amit Varma]: What's your experience working with younger Snehal's as I'm sure you do?
[Guest]: Yeah, that's an interesting question.
[Guest]: And like I had one student who I was working one-on-one with
[Guest]: and I emphasized this a lot with her as, you know, a young teenage girl.
[Guest]: Naturally, there are definitely a lot of insecurities.
[Guest]: So, I emphasized self-knowledge is one of the skills that we're trying to build here
[Guest]: and that extends beyond cricket.
[Guest]: I want like, you know, some of the things that I'll say in coaching
[Guest]: is that I want you to understand your body as to
[Guest]: when your arm comes so far away from your head,
[Guest]: then where the ball will go.
[Guest]: And when your body pivots so well, then where the ball will go.
[Guest]: I want you to understand those things about your body.
[Guest]: I want you to understand that, you know,
[Guest]: when you're holding the bat in which exact position
[Guest]: are you able to connect the ball well.
[Guest]: So, that kind of self-knowledge, that technical self-knowledge is important, yes.
[Guest]: But I also encourage her to journal.
[Guest]: I also encourage her to kind of write down her thoughts.
[Guest]: I also encourage her to talk to her near and dear ones
[Guest]: about the things that you might, you know, not usually talk to
[Guest]: to have those conversations.
[Guest]: And as someone who is providing that guidance, you can help.
[Guest]: But it's absolutely true that everyone has their own journey.
[Guest]: Everyone has their own path.
[Guest]: I am 100% convinced that if you don't have this mentor in your life,
[Guest]: that path takes a lot longer.
[Guest]: But even with the mentor in your life,
[Guest]: they can't walk it for you.
[Guest]: You have to be the one.
[Guest]: But there are, for example, like when you talk about cricket,
[Guest]: some exercises that you do,
[Guest]: which make it easier to perform technical actions.
[Guest]: Like, unless you're strong in your shoulders,
[Guest]: you won't be able to rip the ball
[Guest]: when you're bowling it at a certain speed.
[Guest]: So, similarly, some exercises that you do
[Guest]: can help you in your personal growth.
[Guest]: Like, for example, things like meditation,
[Guest]: disconnecting from your phone, social media, journaling.
[Guest]: These are exercises which aren't going to solve the problem for you,
[Guest]: but hopefully give you either skills or insights
[Guest]: for you to kind of solve and recognize those problems yourself.
[Guest]: So, as a coach, you can provide those structures
[Guest]: and hope that those structures can develop
[Guest]: into self-realization and self-knowledge
[Guest]: for whoever you're working with.
[Guest]: And, I mean, it's a process that we have to do ourselves,
[Guest]: as coaches, constantly.
[Guest]: But it can help.
[Guest]: But, like you said, it is up to the individual.
[Guest]: Some individuals will just pick it up faster.
[Guest]: Some individuals will take a lot of time with it.
[Amit Varma]: I want to pick up on your mention of social media there.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I imagine at the time you started playing,
[Amit Varma]: like you said, there weren't too many of you.
[Amit Varma]: Today, I guess a pool of people wanting to play would be larger.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, so are the distractions
[Amit Varma]: and so is the opportunity cost in terms of what else
[Amit Varma]: they could be doing with their time.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, there is Facebook,
[Amit Varma]: which I think today renamed itself to Meta,
[Amit Varma]: so I have to stop using that word.
[Amit Varma]: But Facebook, many years ago, did a study
[Amit Varma]: which they suppressed,
[Amit Varma]: which found that social media had a negative impact
[Amit Varma]: on the sort of the mental health of young teenage girls,
[Amit Varma]: specifically.
[Amit Varma]: And Jonathan Haidt, on the episode of another show
[Amit Varma]: that I produced at one point, elaborated a little bit on this
[Amit Varma]: and what studies have kind of found is that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: people a decade and a half back
[Amit Varma]: thought that video games would be bad for boys.
[Amit Varma]: But it turned out boys playing video games was perfectly fine
[Amit Varma]: because problem solving skills and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: it was okay for them.
[Amit Varma]: But for the girls, the social media became a big problem
[Amit Varma]: because typically, if you're a young adolescent
[Amit Varma]: or pre-adolescent girl, you have girls hanging around,
[Amit Varma]: being social, getting to know each other.
[Amit Varma]: But social media made everything performative
[Amit Varma]: with all the pressures of looking your best
[Amit Varma]: on Instagram and Facebook and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And that led to a rise in teenage depression
[Amit Varma]: and suicides in the US.
[Amit Varma]: And it's something that's been spoken a lot about.
[Amit Varma]: And the artists formerly known as Facebook
[Amit Varma]: but now known as Meta kind of apparently suppressed
[Amit Varma]: research that they had to that effect
[Amit Varma]: that it was correct, thereby confirming
[Amit Varma]: what a lot of people were saying.
[Amit Varma]: So when you coach young people,
[Amit Varma]: do you feel that that is also a problem,
[Amit Varma]: that there are all these distractions
[Amit Varma]: or does it mean that the people who've come to you
[Amit Varma]: for coaching in any case by a process of self-selection
[Amit Varma]: are the people who are the most driven anyway?
[Guest]: I would firstly say that I don't have enough sample size
[Guest]: to answer this question because I usually coach
[Guest]: on a one-on-one basis.
[Guest]: And if I'm in charge of a team of young girls
[Guest]: or in a big academy, then it will probably
[Guest]: give me a bigger picture.
[Guest]: Two, like you said, the students who do come to me
[Guest]: are the ones who are serious.
[Guest]: They're the ones whose parents are ready to invest
[Guest]: a significant amount of time driving them
[Guest]: to and from wherever they are.
[Guest]: They're the ones whose parents are ready to invest fees.
[Guest]: So they're already convinced that this is something
[Guest]: that they want to get serious about.
[Guest]: So when I tell them to stay off their phones at night
[Guest]: or give them social media-related advice,
[Guest]: they're usually more likely to follow it.
[Guest]: In general, yes, social media definitely has thrown up,
[Guest]: does throw up so many new challenges
[Guest]: which we're kind of figuring out how to do.
[Guest]: I mean, even when I was playing,
[Guest]: that is five, six years ago until I retired,
[Guest]: conversations on social media
[Guest]: within the women's cricket circuit were quite common.
[Guest]: It is an oft-repeated fact in the women's cricket circuit
[Guest]: that Elise Perry is not on any social media.
[Guest]: And she's there because she's at the level
[Guest]: that she's at right now because she's recognized
[Guest]: that to get there requires a certain amount of focus,
[Guest]: requires a certain amount of sacrifice,
[Guest]: requires a certain amount of subtraction from your life.
[Guest]: And it's only now that she's achieved what she's achieved
[Guest]: and started an Instagram or a Twitter or whatever it is.
[Guest]: So that is something that, you know, does get repeated.
[Guest]: There is a general grumbling that the younger generation
[Guest]: uses social media too much.
[Guest]: But I'm not close enough to this problem
[Guest]: to kind of properly comment on it.
[Guest]: I mean, in my life, social media is also a huge distraction
[Guest]: but also a huge asset.
[Guest]: I mean, my entire brand, so to speak,
[Guest]: has been built on social media.
[Guest]: I'm not the kind of player who played a hundred tests.
[Guest]: And therefore, I had to assert my credibility, almost,
[Guest]: through my work on social media.
[Guest]: My playing career doesn't speak for itself.
[Guest]: So, yeah, it can work both ways.
[Guest]: But I recognize that, I mean,
[Guest]: in my life, I spend too much time on Twitter.
[Amit Varma]: In my life, I spend too much time on Twitter as well.
[Amit Varma]: And I can also rationalize by saying that,
[Amit Varma]: I reach out to people and I'm connected with readers or listeners or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But at some level, that's kind of a cop-out.
[Amit Varma]: Now, earlier you mentioned the role of happenstance.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember this line that really struck me
[Amit Varma]: from the Fireburns Blue by Karunayan Siddhant,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll read out, says,
[Amit Varma]: quote, if today's women's cricket is a community,
[Amit Varma]: it's because of Shanta Rangaswamy.
[Amit Varma]: If it is competitive, it's because of Diana Adulji.
[Amit Varma]: Helping it take that vital step towards professionalism
[Amit Varma]: was a vision, efficiency and diplomacy of Shobhangi Kulkarni.
[Amit Varma]: And again, it's happenstance that one of these three sort of pioneers
[Amit Varma]: who played such a big role was a big part of your life
[Amit Varma]: and you got to benefit from that
[Amit Varma]: and many other people kind of wouldn't have, which is great luck.
[Amit Varma]: But also another stroke of luck that you've also had a recent video about
[Amit Varma]: was your parents in the sense that they were so supportive through everything.
[Amit Varma]: And you just mentioned about how a lot of the kids who come to you,
[Amit Varma]: their parents are a big part of it.
[Amit Varma]: They'll drive them there from far places and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And that can be a little bit of a double-edged sword, right?
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand you're passionate about something
[Amit Varma]: and it's great if your parents support you
[Amit Varma]: and they're not going the conventional way saying
[Amit Varma]: you don't do medical or engineering or MBA,
[Amit Varma]: but they support you, that's great.
[Amit Varma]: But the flip side of that also is as we've seen in the past
[Amit Varma]: is that parents can sometimes push you too hard.
[Amit Varma]: You know, they can kind of want to live vicariously through you
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and that can also be sort of a problem with kids.
[Amit Varma]: So what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Before answering that question, I must point out that
[Guest]: I was lucky enough to spend a lot of time around not one,
[Guest]: but two of those great pioneers.
[Guest]: Because when I was 21, I got employed with Western Railway.
[Guest]: The senior sports officer at Western Railway,
[Guest]: the woman in charge of everything, not just cricket, but all sports
[Guest]: was Diana Adiljee and who went on to play a huge role
[Guest]: in cricket administration later.
[Guest]: And my God, what a force that woman is really, not even was.
[Guest]: So lucky enough, like you said, that Happenstance had these two people
[Guest]: who were kind of driving women's cricket forward in their own different way.
[Guest]: To come to the question about parents, it's definitely a thing
[Guest]: that you have these parents who are a little too over-involved.
[Guest]: I luckily didn't.
[Guest]: Like I said, my entire family is, you know,
[Guest]: a family where education is fairly important.
[Guest]: My parents actually split up when I was about 13 or 14.
[Guest]: But despite that, we still lived in the same building.
[Guest]: So they were still sharing the kind of responsibilities
[Guest]: of making sure that my cricket is always taken care of.
[Guest]: That was never compromised on.
[Guest]: What has been probably again lucky for me is that
[Guest]: since they didn't really have like sporting aspirations of their own,
[Guest]: they never imposed their aspirations or their dreams on me
[Guest]: and kind of let me take my own path.
[Guest]: Like I said, I moved, I joined Western Railway when I was 21
[Guest]: and at that point I moved out of home.
[Guest]: I moved from Pune to Mumbai.
[Guest]: Again, wonderful support from both my parents in that respect
[Guest]: and the entire family, not just my father and my mother.
[Guest]: So I can't really speak for the people whose parents can be too overbearing
[Guest]: with coaches or with the children who I teach,
[Guest]: children who I work with.
[Guest]: I kind of make it clear to the parents that
[Guest]: you will drop the kid to training,
[Guest]: but then you're kind of out of bounds.
[Guest]: After that, all yours.
[Guest]: But I don't want a parent coming and telling that,
[Guest]: oh, she should do this, she should do that
[Guest]: because she doesn't do this or doesn't do that.
[Guest]: I don't want that happening in my coaching.
[Guest]: So that's a line that I draw.
[Guest]: I've been lucky that I've worked with parents that kind of understand that.
[Guest]: It's something that I drive through in my online coaching programs also.
[Guest]: I've now built an online coaching program
[Guest]: which is designed specifically for parent-children combination.
[Guest]: So this is my target audience almost
[Guest]: is these parents that you're talking about
[Guest]: who want to invest a hundred balls a day,
[Guest]: who want to bowl a thousand balls a day to their kid.
[Guest]: And almost they might be having cricketing aspirations of their own
[Guest]: and they want to see their kids fulfill those.
[Guest]: I always try and convey that cricket is not everything.
[Guest]: Please do other things, play other sports, read.
[Guest]: In a subtle way, I try to convey that there is more to life than cricket.
[Guest]: In fact, I mean, part of that online training program that I'm trying to build,
[Guest]: I'm trying to build a series of educational programs
[Guest]: on what you can do as in how you can get a job in cricket
[Guest]: if you don't make it as a cricketer.
[Guest]: Because the fact is that 95%, 97%, 99% of people
[Guest]: aren't going to make it as cricketers.
[Guest]: So how can you be as lucky as I was
[Guest]: and you were able to stay connected to cricket as a part of your profession
[Guest]: even after actually quitting the game
[Guest]: is something that I'm hoping to build out in the future.
[Guest]: So I try, it's not something I actively talk about
[Guest]: or it's not something I kind of try to shout through.
[Guest]: But in subtle ways, I try to just encourage them
[Guest]: that this is also something you could do
[Guest]: and also make them aware that, you know,
[Guest]: despite our best efforts, that dream may not be fulfilled.
[Guest]: Okay, that's okay.
[Amit Varma]: When I was going through your website,
[Amit Varma]: one of the fascinating things was you have these separate buttons side by side
[Amit Varma]: where, you know, one for children to click
[Amit Varma]: and one for parents to click if they want to learn, which is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And also this aspect of figuring out stuff outside cricket,
[Amit Varma]: like CLR James said, what do they of cricket know, who only cricket know.
[Amit Varma]: I have another question for you because you mentioned Dana Edulji
[Amit Varma]: and what a remarkable woman she was.
[Amit Varma]: This takes me back to a thought I had while recording my episode with Kavita Rao
[Amit Varma]: where she's written this wonderful book on these women doctors of the 19th century.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that struck me there was that
[Amit Varma]: just to be a woman doctor in the 19th century,
[Amit Varma]: you had to be prima facie absolutely remarkable
[Amit Varma]: because it wasn't just a question of the aptitude or the interest in the subject,
[Amit Varma]: but you also had to have the massive will to make it through all the obstacles in your way.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, it strikes me that as far as these cricketing pioneers are concerned,
[Amit Varma]: including the three people we just mentioned
[Amit Varma]: and the two people who've, in a sense, mentored you,
[Amit Varma]: it kind of strikes me that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: that there is that intersection of great talent and great will that is very rare.
[Amit Varma]: And in women's cricket, you have to have that.
[Amit Varma]: And in men's cricket, you possibly don't.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just by having great talent and being in the right place at the right time,
[Amit Varma]: you can make it to a fairly high level.
[Amit Varma]: But in women's cricket, with all the obstacles, deciding to stick with it,
[Amit Varma]: deciding not to do any of the hundred other things that you can do,
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of crazy.
[Amit Varma]: And is that something that you see still today?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I'm pretty sure it's true of the pioneers.
[Amit Varma]: And also, you know, when you mentioned that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: Dhana Adulji was a remarkable woman and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Expand on that a little bit. I'd love to know.
[Guest]: So going to slightly disagree with you there is that even in men's cricket,
[Guest]: I don't think you can make it nowadays just because of the sheer volumes
[Guest]: and the competition that we have without both those great talent and great will.
[Guest]: But in terms of what is required at a pioneer stage,
[Guest]: that's literally the job description of a pioneer, I suppose.
[Guest]: You know, whether it's in women's cricket or whether it's in the freedom struggle
[Guest]: or any kind of field where they're breaking glass ceilings.
[Guest]: I have this saying which I sadly have to agree with,
[Guest]: is that, you know, people who break glass ceilings often have bloody fists.
[Guest]: And it's especially true, I think, of some of the pioneers of the women's cricket generation
[Guest]: because they gave up so much in terms of what they had to go through
[Guest]: to simply play the sport that they loved.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember you would have read this in the book.
[Guest]: There's an incidence where Shanta Rangaswamy was protesting against
[Guest]: some mismanagement by the administration and she was dropped.
[Guest]: She was like simply dropped from the team.
[Guest]: Similarly, Dhana Adulji has pushed through so much to build up the legacy
[Guest]: that the Indian Railways really has.
[Guest]: She is the first women's cricketer to be employed by Railways
[Guest]: and she's the start of that legacy where she really put her name forward
[Guest]: to a politician at the time saying that my father is retiring from Western Railway.
[Guest]: I would like to take his place because there was this system of, you know,
[Guest]: almost compensatory employment.
[Guest]: And she then just worked and worked and worked to have more and more cricketers employed.
[Guest]: So, like, you know, what we hear feminists say nowadays
[Guest]: that if you get an opportunity, you should do your best to make sure
[Guest]: that that opportunity is also available to the next generation of women
[Guest]: who come after you.
[Guest]: Before feminism really existed in the Indian consciousness,
[Guest]: these women were doing it and at the time great social cost
[Guest]: because you are putting yourself almost as a villain in many cases
[Guest]: to fight the case of women's cricket against very often male-dominated situations.
[Guest]: And it's not going to be easy at all.
[Guest]: In terms of my own experience with Diana Ma'am,
[Guest]: she was always this extremely senior figure
[Guest]: and I was just joining Western Railway in the early 20s.
[Guest]: What used to happen is that she was posted in the office at Churchgate,
[Guest]: of course, that's the headquarters for Western Railway.
[Guest]: I was posted at Bombay Central, but one month of the year
[Guest]: we would all spend at Churchgate where we were handling the railway recruitment drives.
[Guest]: The entire women's cricket team would kind of be recruited
[Guest]: to just help out with that work and we would see her
[Guest]: literally having phone calls constantly, having meetings constantly
[Guest]: to make sure that Western Railway remained the top railway in terms of sports.
[Guest]: Whether it's berating some coach who has not done his job
[Guest]: or whether it's making calls to make sure that this team is being transported
[Guest]: here in the best possible arrangements.
[Guest]: Western Railway always pushed for the best talent,
[Guest]: the best kind of accommodation whenever our inter-railway tournaments used to happen.
[Guest]: She would always travel with us for inter-railway because we were her team.
[Guest]: If we didn't do well, then it was a matter of pride for her
[Guest]: and nothing less than winning is acceptable
[Guest]: is the culture that she built out at Western Railway.
[Guest]: And there are some downsides to that culture.
[Guest]: Yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: But the expectations, the high expectations that were set
[Guest]: was something that she did very rigorously.
[Guest]: And there was an aura of fear usually around her
[Guest]: because you do not want to get on her bad side
[Guest]: because you would be sitting in those offices
[Guest]: and of course they are not like sealed glass cabins
[Guest]: which are soundproof.
[Guest]: I can just still imagine those thin walled Western Railway offices
[Guest]: where the upper sections of the high ceiling are just open
[Guest]: and everything that is being spoken inside is carrying out.
[Guest]: And you will hear her sometimes tearing into someone
[Guest]: who is not performed as per expectations.
[Guest]: I remember once I picked up an injury which she wasn't very happy about
[Guest]: and oh my god, that was an uncomfortable conversation.
[Guest]: But also this fierce admiration for someone who you knew would have your back
[Guest]: and make sure that you had the best in terms of coaching,
[Guest]: in terms of facilities available for the railways,
[Guest]: in terms of the kinds of leaves that we were able to get.
[Guest]: And to the extent that Western Railway was very often the envy
[Guest]: of pretty much every other team
[Guest]: because we had someone fighting for us, someone in our corner.
[Guest]: So I can imagine, it's a great tragedy that we don't have records,
[Guest]: we don't have any kind of visual evidence of very little photos,
[Guest]: photographic evidence of some of these players in their prime.
[Guest]: And you look at them now when they are in their 50s and their 60s
[Guest]: and still they are so impressive.
[Guest]: And definitely as players you would think,
[Guest]: would have been very interesting to be in the same team as them.
[Guest]: Never a dull moment.
[Amit Varma]: It's really interesting to me that your first class cricket really,
[Amit Varma]: the equivalent of first class cricket for women really started in the 70s
[Amit Varma]: but eventually railways was like the dominant team
[Amit Varma]: because it just employed all the best players.
[Amit Varma]: So it just tells you kind of the force of one woman in building an ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: and what difference just one person can sometimes make.
[Amit Varma]: I think they won 19 out of 20 tournaments or something like that
[Amit Varma]: till a particular point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of get back to your sort of career now.
[Amit Varma]: You're this young teenager, you go to the nets,
[Amit Varma]: you want to be a wicketkeeper, they make you a fast bowler,
[Amit Varma]: you find out you're good at it.
[Amit Varma]: And then Amrita Shinde joins in 2006 and that kind of helps you along.
[Amit Varma]: And in 2008, you make your debut,
[Amit Varma]: and eventually you're bowling alongside Jhulan Goswami.
[Amit Varma]: I think in your first ODI, you took three wickets while she took two.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what that experience was like
[Amit Varma]: actually playing for the national team.
[Guest]: So let me build up a little bit to that
[Guest]: in recognizing what led to that finally happening.
[Guest]: In terms of A, 2006, BCCI coming over,
[Guest]: we're playing on better grounds, better facilities,
[Guest]: all those kind of things, no longer living in dormitories,
[Guest]: no longer traveling unreserved.
[Guest]: Instead, we're traveling AC, buses, planes and living in twin sharing.
[Guest]: Oh my God, twin sharing, so cool.
[Guest]: That kind of a shift.
[Guest]: At the same time, we're now exposed to a much higher standard of cricket
[Guest]: thanks to players who are playing for the likes of Air India
[Guest]: coming back into the Maharashtra team.
[Guest]: That helped, you know, just make one step up.
[Guest]: 2007, like I said, I joined Railways and Western Railways.
[Guest]: Western Railway was the strongest team on the circuit.
[Guest]: Playing in that environment,
[Guest]: where suddenly I'm not the meanest bowler on the pitch
[Guest]: and, you know, there are batters who have,
[Guest]: out of the top six batters, four would have played for India
[Guest]: and pitting myself against them also then accelerated my development.
[Guest]: And of course, being in Western Railway
[Guest]: and having a little more structured training, etc.
[Guest]: And then the call came.
[Guest]: It wasn't even a call.
[Guest]: I mean, the whole process of, you know,
[Guest]: informing people of their selection is just so
[Guest]: poorly managed in India.
[Guest]: I didn't expect to be picked for the series that I was picked for,
[Guest]: which was the Asia Cup in Sri Lanka in 2008.
[Guest]: We had had a camp before that.
[Guest]: I had done okay, okay, but, you know,
[Guest]: it wasn't really a breakthrough performance.
[Guest]: But obviously, the selectors saw some talent.
[Guest]: They decided to take a chance on it.
[Guest]: I was at home, got a message from one of the players
[Guest]: saying that, oh, congrats. I'm like, ah, for what?
[Guest]: Then suddenly, you know, the Internet has
[Guest]: made its appearance in life. Go check websites.
[Guest]: And I actually see my name there, which is really cool.
[Guest]: I had gotten a little bit of a taste of what it would be like
[Guest]: to receive in kind of an India cap a few years earlier
[Guest]: when I had played for India under 21,
[Guest]: where we had gone to Pakistan.
[Guest]: But actually arriving there,
[Guest]: we're given this box a few days before our departure,
[Guest]: which at the time Nike was sponsoring the BCCI.
[Guest]: I'm like still in Nike kit.
[Guest]: I've just had a sports session this morning.
[Guest]: So I'm still in kit.
[Guest]: And there's this box of Nike packaging
[Guest]: which we can take to our rooms and open.
[Guest]: And we're all going through it.
[Guest]: And we find our caps, our India caps.
[Guest]: There was no culture of,
[Guest]: no paddhat of cap presentation and all, you know.
[Guest]: You got your India cap, now wear it
[Guest]: and come onto the field was the kind of situation.
[Guest]: I remember the first training session we had in Sri Lanka.
[Guest]: I was so sick from some kind of food poisoning.
[Guest]: I was vomiting on the ground.
[Guest]: Wasn't really able to practice at all,
[Guest]: almost blacking out.
[Guest]: And I was like, oh shit,
[Guest]: what a bad way to make a first impression.
[Guest]: And then finally,
[Guest]: stomach settled down, nerves settled down
[Guest]: and we got in.
[Guest]: That match that you're talking about
[Guest]: wasn't actually my first match for India.
[Guest]: There was another match before that against Bangladesh.
[Guest]: But at the time, Bangladesh didn't have ODI status.
[Guest]: So therefore, it doesn't count as an official ODI.
[Guest]: It doesn't count as my first match.
[Guest]: But that was my first match against Bangladesh.
[Guest]: The second match was against Pakistan.
[Guest]: To do well in both those matches was nice
[Guest]: to hear Mithali Raj say, you know,
[Guest]: standing at mid-off and saying,
[Guest]: no, you bowl your full 10 overs.
[Guest]: To have a show that kind of confidence in me
[Guest]: was really cool for a young cricketer
[Guest]: to, you know, go to the dressing room afterwards
[Guest]: and ask Jhuludi, Jhuludi, how did I do?
[Guest]: And to hear that, you know, yeah, you did well.
[Guest]: You can do better.
[Guest]: To get that kind of direct encouragement
[Guest]: and feedback was incredible.
[Guest]: And I remember on that tour, Jhuludi actually,
[Guest]: I think she completed the landmark of 100 wickets.
[Guest]: So being on that tour, being a part of that
[Guest]: was another special feeling.
[Guest]: There are very few people on the women's cricket circuit
[Guest]: who I've connected on a wavelength with.
[Guest]: And fortunately for me, one of the people I looked up to was one of them.
[Guest]: Jhuludi was one of them.
[Guest]: And she had this, at the same time,
[Guest]: competitiveness, extreme competitiveness,
[Guest]: but at the same time, this ability to,
[Guest]: you know, take the focus off herself
[Guest]: and guide the younger players.
[Guest]: And again, I keep saying this, it keeps popping up,
[Guest]: but I almost wonder whether it,
[Guest]: how much energy she must have been pouring
[Guest]: still from what these kids say,
[Guest]: pouring into the current crop of younger cricketers.
[Guest]: And just, despite that she's just an amazing cricketer
[Guest]: and the cricketer that she is, is amazing.
[Guest]: So overall, getting to fulfil that dream
[Guest]: was an incredible experience.
[Guest]: Where, you know, you have a dream of opening the bowling
[Guest]: with Jhulen Goswami for India.
[Guest]: Got to do that, and that was pretty cool.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and her longevity is also amazing for a fast bowler.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, to give almost 20 years
[Amit Varma]: is kind of crazy.
[Amit Varma]: So that 3 for 21 you took in the game against Pakistan,
[Amit Varma]: it was at one stretch, those 10 overs?
[Guest]: Yeah, those 10 overs, as far as I remember.
[Guest]: I'll have to check ball by ball to be sure.
[Guest]: But as far as I remember, those 10 overs were at a stretch.
[Amit Varma]: Wow, that's crazy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, that is really kind of tough physically.
[Amit Varma]: You know, just in terms of physical conditioning by this time,
[Amit Varma]: I guess you had proper coaches and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And give me a sense from a fast bowling perspective,
[Amit Varma]: how different approaching a match is for a fast bowler
[Amit Varma]: as opposed to a batsman, for example,
[Amit Varma]: or even a spinner?
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, the spinners are the...
[Guest]: they have the easiest job.
[Guest]: But for me, that had kind of become something
[Guest]: I'd been known for on the domestic circuit.
[Guest]: You know, in the few seasons leading up to playing for India
[Guest]: and at that time, I had become a bit of a new ball specialist.
[Guest]: I had become someone who can...
[Guest]: who regularly will bowl 10 overs upfront with a new ball.
[Guest]: So, it wasn't down to any kind of specific training regime.
[Guest]: It was probably just a lot of bowling.
[Guest]: You know, we hear these two schools of thought nowadays within cricket.
[Guest]: One is that, you know, you have your workload management
[Guest]: is that bowl only X number of balls per week, per day.
[Guest]: And then you do the rest of your miles
[Guest]: in your cardio or something.
[Guest]: And we didn't have any of those concepts.
[Guest]: It was just sheerly bowling in the nets
[Guest]: for almost an hour, hour and 15 minutes
[Guest]: is how we used to kind of build up that kind of bowling fitness.
[Guest]: Despite having a few coaches here and there,
[Guest]: there was only probably one other coach
[Guest]: in the state setup who had, you know,
[Guest]: shown that they have a very high level of knowledge.
[Guest]: But I had not yet met someone who was able to
[Guest]: impress as a coach even in my first few years
[Guest]: in Western Delhi.
[Guest]: But just training with a team like Western Delhi
[Guest]: where we were putting in a little more hours
[Guest]: in terms of what we were doing.
[Guest]: There was a gym there, so I was doing gym work
[Guest]: properly for the first time in my life.
[Guest]: I had been doing some gym before that.
[Guest]: We had this tradition of going for weekly runs to Juhu beach.
[Guest]: And we would head there and reach there by sunrise
[Guest]: and do a 45 minute, sometimes one hour long distance run.
[Guest]: So these very old fashioned training methods,
[Guest]: no real knowledge about nutrition,
[Guest]: no real knowledge about recovery,
[Guest]: no dedicated time, energy, resources to really do this.
[Guest]: Just try and have as much, you know,
[Guest]: regular home food as you can.
[Guest]: That was kind of how it went back then.
[Guest]: In terms of preparation for matches,
[Guest]: one challenge of, you know,
[Guest]: bowling those 10 overs at a stretch.
[Guest]: For me, I'm someone who sweats a lot.
[Guest]: I mean, they used to call me the Rahul Dravid of the women's cricket team.
[Guest]: That much.
[Guest]: No one would hug me after I took a wicket.
[Guest]: Let's just say that.
[Guest]: And one of the big challenges was cramps.
[Guest]: One of the big challenges was,
[Guest]: especially training a lot in Mumbai,
[Guest]: very often playing in hot, humid conditions,
[Guest]: was cramps.
[Guest]: So hydration, even though there was very little knowledge of nutrition
[Guest]: and those kind of things,
[Guest]: hydration became something that I paid a lot of attention to.
[Guest]: So day before the match, my hydration would start.
[Guest]: A day before the match, I would have my favorite brand of ORS
[Guest]: mixed into a bottle, ready.
[Guest]: And I would kind of consume the entire quota
[Guest]: a day before the game.
[Guest]: During the game, everyone knew
[Guest]: this is Poppy's bottle.
[Guest]: Poppy, I mean, my nickname during my playing years was Poppy.
[Guest]: So this is Poppy's bottle. Everyone knew.
[Guest]: No one else touched that.
[Guest]: And every opportunity,
[Guest]: whether it's, you know, a small pause in the game,
[Guest]: someone will come,
[Guest]: the 12th man will come inside and run
[Guest]: me drinks.
[Guest]: So that was something that
[Guest]: I always constantly
[Guest]: was conscious of, worked on.
[Guest]: It was always,
[Guest]: I mean, I marveled at all-rounders, you know,
[Guest]: I looked at people who were proper fast-bowling all-rounders.
[Guest]: I'm like, how did you do it?
[Guest]: Because it was exhausting.
[Guest]: Let's be honest.
[Guest]: That kind of training, that kind of preparation.
[Guest]: Of course, by that time, I was also working in Western Railways.
[Guest]: So I had to spend half a day in an office
[Guest]: where all you want to do is curl up and sleep
[Guest]: rather than, you know, going through dusty old files
[Guest]: and having to sort them alphabetically
[Guest]: only to find out two days later
[Guest]: that it's all been jumbled up.
[Guest]: That kind of experience was exhausting.
[Guest]: So I really had no concept of
[Guest]: how these all-rounders did it.
[Guest]: How people who were, Gurumeli Dhar for one example,
[Guest]: I mean, fantastic all-rounder for India,
[Guest]: regularly bowled 8-10 overs
[Guest]: and batted at, you know, 4-5-6 in the middle order.
[Guest]: And I marveled at that.
[Guest]: But it was, at that stage, incomprehensible to me.
[Guest]: I was just about able to kind of
[Guest]: pour all my energies into bowling.
[Guest]: It got me to that stage that it did.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I think, speaking of Gurumeli Dhar,
[Amit Varma]: she, I think, made a quick fire of 50
[Amit Varma]: at Modana Rannabowl in that particular match against Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that Railways thing
[Amit Varma]: because my impression was you get a sports quota job,
[Amit Varma]: you're basically playing sports.
[Guest]: But you also had to go to office and look through files.
[Amit Varma]: What was your work there?
[Guest]: Oh, that was such a phase in life.
[Guest]: Because, I mean, Dhanayadal ji was there.
[Guest]: She had kind of created a system where, you know,
[Guest]: new players coming in had a place to stay in Mumbai.
[Guest]: So, that first struggle of, you know, where to stay in Mumbai
[Guest]: wasn't as big a struggle in terms of finding that place.
[Guest]: Getting used to that place was a different issue
[Guest]: because it was a railway quarter in Matunga.
[Guest]: The Matunga Western Line Station right next to it.
[Guest]: Still, when you pass from Matunga to Mahim
[Guest]: and you look on your right,
[Guest]: you will see those probably blue and white painted houses.
[Guest]: You know, once upon a time, I used to live in one of those houses
[Guest]: where we're banged next to the railway tracks
[Guest]: which is why, I mean, hearing just the train sounds in Mumbai
[Guest]: is just a part of my psyche, I suppose.
[Guest]: And we're seven people in that flat.
[Guest]: We're seven girls, all girls from the women's cricket team
[Guest]: staying in that flat.
[Guest]: It's literally two rooms and a kitchen.
[Guest]: And everyone has different schedules.
[Guest]: There is no real furniture.
[Guest]: We're sleeping on bedrolls on the floor.
[Guest]: We're using that place as, you know, just to crash, essentially.
[Guest]: I was lucky enough that I could,
[Guest]: I was close by enough to go to Bombay on the,
[Guest]: go to Pune on the weekends, etc.
[Guest]: and enjoy home comforts.
[Guest]: But moving to Mumbai, living in that kind of place
[Guest]: after, you know, experiencing Pune and Mumbai,
[Guest]: anyways, the amount of space you have available to you
[Guest]: is so very different.
[Guest]: Then commuting every day, like, our routine was almost
[Guest]: sometimes, if we're doing twice a day training,
[Guest]: leave Matungar around 6.30.
[Guest]: By 7.15, travel to Lower Parel
[Guest]: where the Western Railway ground is at Mahalakshmi
[Guest]: which is opposite Phoenix Mills and High Street Phoenix
[Guest]: which is now High Street Phoenix.
[Guest]: There, 7.15 to 8.15, 9, have a morning session
[Guest]: whether that's fitness, whether that is a gym,
[Guest]: whether whatever is happening at that phase in time.
[Guest]: Use the dormitories there to bathe, change,
[Guest]: head to office, get to office by 10 a.m.
[Guest]: Stay in office, torturous 3 hours
[Guest]: and leave at 1 p.m.
[Guest]: So, the facility that we received was half day.
[Guest]: Being a Sports Quota athlete,
[Guest]: you could basically, you had to go to the office half day,
[Guest]: leave at 1.
[Guest]: The stories that you hear of, you know, people
[Guest]: being signed on Sports Quota and then just never having to turn up
[Guest]: are either stories of extremely elite athletes
[Guest]: who set conditions that, you know,
[Guest]: okay, sorry, we're not going to turn up in an office ever
[Guest]: and the Railways wants them so bad that they accept those conditions
[Guest]: or people whose offices can be managed,
[Guest]: whose offices are, you know, cooperative enough to
[Guest]: yeah, okay, fine, don't come, that's okay
[Guest]: because everyone finally is posted into an office
[Guest]: and you're under a particular boss,
[Guest]: totally depends on how that boss is with regards to how you are,
[Guest]: how much workload that space has.
[Guest]: I mean, within Western Railway, people who are posted at headquarters,
[Guest]: Churchgate, usually had very less workloads.
[Guest]: People who are posted like me at Bombay Central,
[Guest]: working in the Bombay division, not headquarters division,
[Guest]: had very high workloads.
[Guest]: So, we had no such allowances.
[Guest]: There were, of course, a lot of our players who worked at,
[Guest]: who worked as TCs and they didn't have weekends off.
[Guest]: They had only one day off a week
[Guest]: that may not even be on a Saturday, Sunday.
[Guest]: They would actually be in trains checking tickets.
[Guest]: So, that sometimes was like a good thing or a bad thing
[Guest]: because you're kind of on the fly.
[Guest]: It's easy to fly away when you're on the fly.
[Guest]: And then after 1 p.m., have food, usually outside somewhere
[Guest]: and head back to Mahalakshmi.
[Guest]: The dormitory is there, had beds.
[Guest]: So, we would usually catch an afternoon nap for an hour
[Guest]: and then 4 to 6 p.m., training again.
[Guest]: 6 p.m., get back and travel back to Matunga.
[Guest]: It took us about half an hour, 45 minutes.
[Guest]: 7, 7.30 p.m., back, have food.
[Guest]: And if you have any energy left for any recreation,
[Guest]: that's the time you got.
[Guest]: And that was the kind of routine that we had.
[Guest]: That was the kind of routine that I lived for a very long time
[Guest]: when I was living in that flat.
[Guest]: Eventually, I moved out and lived with friends.
[Guest]: But it is a very different kind of life.
[Guest]: But at the same time, everyone exists, everyone accepted
[Guest]: that it is a very normal life for women's cricketers.
[Guest]: I mean, just at any point of time in that flat,
[Guest]: there were at least 2 India cricketers there.
[Guest]: I think when I was there, there were 4 out of the 7
[Guest]: had played for India.
[Guest]: So, that was what an India cricketer's life is like.
[Amit Varma]: Wow. And at this point, how are you sort of thinking
[Amit Varma]: about your life ahead?
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, there is a game,
[Amit Varma]: but at the same time, the Indian team just isn't playing so much.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, it's not like you're going to play 100 test matches.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's just not there. Obviously, I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: you're not thinking that, oh, I want to be in railways all my life.
[Amit Varma]: This is a great life.
[Amit Varma]: So, how are you kind of thinking of life outside of cricket,
[Amit Varma]: after cricket and so on?
[Guest]: To be honest, I mean, in those early years,
[Guest]: I'm not thinking about after cricket because,
[Guest]: I mean, just the hope is that, you know,
[Guest]: you can make as much of this life as possible
[Guest]: and stay in cricket and continue to play
[Guest]: at a high level for as long as you can.
[Guest]: You quickly realize that that's not always possible.
[Guest]: There is, you know, at that time, so much insecurity in the team,
[Guest]: so much inconsistency and arbitrariness in selection.
[Guest]: Absolutely no concept of, you know, nurturing a player.
[Guest]: I mean, thinking back right now,
[Guest]: if I was an administrator and I had a female bowler
[Guest]: who was six feet tall, I would be making sure
[Guest]: that I nurture that bowler.
[Guest]: And there were two or three of us who were,
[Guest]: you know, physically gifted like that.
[Guest]: I would be making sure that I nurture that player
[Guest]: and having her as kind of a backup
[Guest]: and a succession for Jhulan Goswami.
[Guest]: There was absolutely no thought like that
[Guest]: because you have to remember,
[Guest]: after the BCCI took over women's cricket,
[Guest]: something changed for the better, like I described before,
[Guest]: but something's changed for the worse.
[Guest]: We were no longer the number one priority
[Guest]: of the association who was governing us.
[Guest]: So, you know, whether there was a coach,
[Guest]: whether there was a national team program,
[Guest]: national team coaches also were on a revolving musical chair.
[Guest]: So that's the context.
[Guest]: That's the environment that we're kind of in
[Guest]: and it's an environment of survival rather than prosperity.
[Guest]: You know, you can't think about flourishing.
[Guest]: You're just thinking about keeping your head above the water.
[Guest]: And this is for the few of us who are lucky enough
[Guest]: to have government jobs, salaries,
[Guest]: you know, having already come close to
[Guest]: or having played for India.
[Guest]: Even we are kind of going through that kind of a mindset
[Guest]: or at least I was, I won't speak for the others,
[Guest]: but that was a little glimpse of the environment.
[Guest]: I always knew at the back of my mind
[Guest]: that I'm not going to stay with railways beyond my cricketing years.
[Guest]: I had no idea what I would do.
[Guest]: Absolutely none.
[Guest]: But it was just a, it was an existence of hope
[Guest]: that you continue to stay, continue to survive,
[Guest]: hopefully get opportunities to play at the international level.
[Guest]: If not, you have the fact that there is a railway job
[Guest]: who is kind of, the railway job is supporting you,
[Guest]: which is good, but there is a little bit of a
[Guest]: of a driftness to that existence.
[Guest]: Even if you're playing for India, like you said,
[Guest]: there aren't a lot of matches happening,
[Guest]: three or four tournaments a year.
[Guest]: When the next tournament happens,
[Guest]: whether the coach will be the same,
[Guest]: whether the selectors will still think the same about you,
[Guest]: an atmosphere of insecurity,
[Guest]: despite the security of these public sector jobs,
[Guest]: because you knew that there was no option besides the railways.
[Guest]: It's not like I could, like my,
[Guest]: I had office mates in chess and table tennis
[Guest]: and badminton, and all of them could jump from railways
[Guest]: to petroleum if railways didn't treat them right.
[Guest]: Or, you know, move to like a bank,
[Guest]: whereas women's cricket railways is the only employer.
[Guest]: So there wasn't an abundance of options either.
[Guest]: So it was this, it was this strange time.
[Guest]: And I'm glad that a lot of cricketers today don't have to,
[Guest]: or if they're good enough,
[Guest]: they don't have to kind of go through that kind of time,
[Guest]: despite being grateful to the railways.
[Guest]: I mean, let's be really clear.
[Guest]: If not for that railway job,
[Guest]: I would probably have quit cricket after my graduation.
[Guest]: I turned down engineering, but I did a BSc.
[Guest]: And in my third year, I was thinking about, you know,
[Guest]: higher education.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: How many years can you take,
[Guest]: keep taking money from your parents from,
[Guest]: to continue playing cricket,
[Guest]: which might give you absolutely nothing in the future.
[Guest]: Railways kept me in the game.
[Guest]: Otherwise I would have gone off,
[Guest]: maybe done an MBA and be sitting in some corporate office right now.
[Guest]: Railways kept me in the game.
[Guest]: But at the same time, it's,
[Guest]: it's something which a few colleagues of mine describe as limiting ambitions
[Guest]: by being in that environment.
[Amit Varma]: Thank God you ended up not doing an MBA
[Amit Varma]: and there are plenty of MBAs out there.
[Amit Varma]: That's also the survivorship bias.
[Amit Varma]: So there might be other people who made the same decisions as you,
[Amit Varma]: who might kind of regret making those decisions
[Amit Varma]: and not going in for an MBA.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess that's there.
[Amit Varma]: So during this period,
[Amit Varma]: and obviously, you know, in women's cricket,
[Amit Varma]: matches are simply not happening enough.
[Amit Varma]: Like in the Fire Turns Blue, there is a stroke of how between,
[Amit Varma]: you know, half a generation was lost
[Amit Varma]: because between 86 and 91, there were just no games, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So half a generation was just lost
[Amit Varma]: and couldn't play international cricket and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, which is kind of one of those tragic losses.
[Amit Varma]: Like we speak of, we know Mankat's lost two years during World War II,
[Amit Varma]: but those kind of gaps are just so common in women's cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And obviously that affected you also in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you didn't really play that many games till you eventually bowed out in 2012.
[Amit Varma]: But you also spoke about, you know, if you were an administrator,
[Amit Varma]: you would have nurtured a young Snehal better than what actually happened.
[Amit Varma]: So what really went wrong?
[Amit Varma]: Like where do you feel nurturing would have helped?
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, where did you go wrong?
[Guest]: With my own career?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So one thing was, I remember having this comparative example thrown about.
[Guest]: I think this was the 2009 World Cup,
[Guest]: where we were all in Australia.
[Guest]: And there was, I think we had gone there for a series before.
[Guest]: We were playing Australia in 2008.
[Guest]: And there was a launch event, you know,
[Guest]: like a press event for the upcoming 2009 World Cup.
[Guest]: And there were some representatives from some of the top countries.
[Guest]: Isha Guha was there for England.
[Guest]: The Australians, of course.
[Guest]: I think Susie Bates must have been there from New Zealand.
[Guest]: And I remember at the time hearing or learning
[Guest]: that England had kept the same team for the last four years.
[Guest]: They had had that kind of vision that, you know,
[Guest]: if we're going to do well in the World Cup,
[Guest]: we need to give a lot of match experience to the players who we select.
[Guest]: So they had essentially selected their World Cup team
[Guest]: practically four years before.
[Guest]: And by the time they came into that World Cup,
[Guest]: all of their playing XI and their key players had played about 50 ODIs.
[Guest]: Yeah. So I remember that.
[Guest]: I am thinking I'm so jealous of that.
[Guest]: I'm so jealous of the fact that, you know,
[Guest]: what I had heard at the time was these players are told that,
[Guest]: you know, even if you get four ducks in a row,
[Guest]: you're going to be in the team.
[Guest]: I was like, I'm so jealous of that because I'm constantly
[Guest]: in this environment where despite doing well, I might get dropped.
[Guest]: I mean, the 2009 World Cup, I didn't play a single game.
[Guest]: The next World Cup that was happening after that,
[Guest]: I wasn't in the team.
[Guest]: There was like a domestic tournament before that.
[Guest]: I did OK.
[Guest]: But, you know, you would think that you would hold on to your place
[Guest]: unless you get knocked off at the international level.
[Guest]: At least so much arbitrariness in selections.
[Guest]: I mean, there was one phase where India caps
[Guest]: were being just handed out in a slightly ill manner.
[Guest]: And it's this kind of environment that makes it difficult.
[Guest]: And I'm not going to sit here and blame the environment,
[Guest]: just the environment and, you know, not say that I could have done better.
[Guest]: I've already said that.
[Guest]: Looking back, I wish that I had taken the game more professionally.
[Guest]: I had trained much more.
[Guest]: I had played a lot more matches outside of what, you know,
[Guest]: India or Maharashtra were providing to me,
[Guest]: which are a lot of things that I did in the latter half
[Guest]: of my domestic cricket career and saw value in that.
[Guest]: But, you know, at the time, like we said,
[Guest]: we were figuring things out.
[Guest]: Didn't have this constant coaching,
[Guest]: always moving from, OK, now you're at the Western Railway coach,
[Guest]: now you're at some other coach, now you're at some other coach.
[Guest]: Whereas nowadays, every player you hear at the top level
[Guest]: comes to the top level because they've had this constancy in coaching.
[Guest]: They've had, you know, one person who's kind of,
[Guest]: they always can go back to that one person,
[Guest]: which really wasn't there for me.
[Guest]: So there was no shortage of hard work,
[Guest]: but there was these other things which I wish that I had done differently
[Guest]: in terms of, you know, the time where I lost my place
[Guest]: in the Indian team because of the suspect action calling.
[Guest]: That was one of those phases where I was very much in between coaches.
[Guest]: You know, who should I be learning from exactly?
[Guest]: That is one of the things I wish I had gotten sorted a lot earlier in life.
[Guest]: And the fact is, there weren't as many people
[Guest]: who were becoming personal coaches of women's cricketers back then.
[Guest]: So that is something that I feel I could have done better
[Guest]: in terms of approaching the game more professionally.
[Guest]: I kind of got caught up in the railway's life.
[Guest]: You know, I have to keep the people at office also happy.
[Guest]: I have to make sure I'm doing my best.
[Guest]: Whereas now, thinking back, I could have thought, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, maybe that's just the people pleaser in me thinking that,
[Guest]: but I could have thought, let office go to hell.
[Guest]: I'm here to play cricket.
[Guest]: I can play cricket for a finite amount of years.
[Guest]: I don't care if people in the office are unhappy,
[Guest]: but I'm going to spend more time on the ground.
[Guest]: You know, maybe that's something that I could have thought.
[Guest]: But again, the environment is such that you're penalized
[Guest]: for that kind of thinking.
[Guest]: I mean, if I just drop everything and run
[Guest]: and not turn up to office for five days,
[Guest]: I have to go back and face consequences at some point.
[Guest]: Which is, I mean, things that happened.
[Guest]: I, at one point, got charge-sheeted in the office for not turning up
[Guest]: when they called me to work on a weekend.
[Amit Varma]: So, they have charge-sheets.
[Guest]: They have charge-sheets.
[Guest]: This is the literal word, charge-sheets.
[Guest]: I can still remember the word sitting on those brown faded paper.
[Amit Varma]: Oh my God.
[Guest]: Jesus.
[Guest]: So, that was, it was a semi-professional environment.
[Guest]: We keep talking about, you know,
[Guest]: how India has professional contracts for the top 20 players.
[Guest]: Okay, fine.
[Guest]: 2015 onwards, that existed.
[Guest]: In our time, there was no such thing as an India contract.
[Guest]: You go to one tour.
[Guest]: Okay, you earn a lot more money
[Guest]: than you've ever earned before playing cricket for the BCCI.
[Guest]: But suddenly, the next tour, that doesn't exist.
[Guest]: So, that's something that we're aware of.
[Guest]: That this kind of, there's no constancy,
[Guest]: there's no financial support.
[Guest]: Besides, you know, I keep complaining,
[Guest]: but I have a railway job.
[Guest]: Still, I'm thinking like this.
[Guest]: I'm kind of stuck in this kind of thinking.
[Guest]: So, I wish my thinking had been very different.
[Guest]: The kind of thinking that now I approach my,
[Guest]: not just media career, but also the career
[Guest]: where I'm trying to build my own coaching,
[Guest]: especially my online coaching.
[Guest]: The kind of thinking that I'm applying right now.
[Guest]: The kind of initiative I'm showing
[Guest]: in trying to get the kind of guidance that I need.
[Guest]: I wish I had those kind of attitudes back then.
[Guest]: But I also recognize that the environment is very different
[Guest]: and you have to be like, you know,
[Guest]: some of those pioneers.
[Guest]: This really driven person
[Guest]: to crack that kind of situation.
[Guest]: And which is why I have serious respect
[Guest]: for the likes of, you know, Mithali Raj, Julen Goswami
[Guest]: and people who have been in this situation
[Guest]: and excelled for so long.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one when that happened,
[Amit Varma]: like around 2012, you were called for a suspect action
[Amit Varma]: and your career gradually petered out
[Amit Varma]: and you played your last game, I think in 2015.
[Amit Varma]: So what was that phase like?
[Amit Varma]: Did you feel that you were kind of left alone to fend for yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Not enough support within the system?
[Amit Varma]: And at what point did you start figuring out
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, this is going to end at some point
[Amit Varma]: and I need to think about what I'm going to do beyond that.
[Amit Varma]: So what was sort of that transitional phase like
[Amit Varma]: when you kind of started thinking seriously
[Amit Varma]: about what do I do next?
[Amit Varma]: And also as a general question,
[Amit Varma]: we'll talk about women's cricket more in detail after the break,
[Amit Varma]: but just as a general question,
[Amit Varma]: when male cricketers end their careers, there are often different kinds
[Amit Varma]: of post-career pipelines that are there.
[Amit Varma]: They can enter local administrations
[Amit Varma]: or those who are fortunate enough can get into media
[Amit Varma]: and all these different kind of pipelines are there.
[Amit Varma]: There are precedents for what people have done
[Amit Varma]: and chances are that on average,
[Amit Varma]: they've actually made more money also.
[Amit Varma]: So is there something like that?
[Amit Varma]: Is it like I imagine like for all of us, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like my career really probably ends when I drop down dead.
[Amit Varma]: But for sports people, that's not the case.
[Amit Varma]: For sports people, you are kind of in the peak of your physical life
[Amit Varma]: when suddenly it's over.
[Amit Varma]: Everything that was the center of your life for so long is just done.
[Amit Varma]: So is that something in a general sense that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, how have people around you coped with that?
[Amit Varma]: And in a specific sense,
[Amit Varma]: how was it like you when you started kind of transitioning?
[Guest]: It's actually funny that, you know,
[Guest]: the period where after I was called for a suspect action
[Guest]: and the one year after that was really difficult.
[Guest]: But the phase after that, maybe the last few years of my domestic career
[Guest]: were actually the best cricket that I had ever played
[Guest]: because I had gotten a lot of the things which I wish I had gotten right earlier.
[Guest]: I had gotten them right later.
[Guest]: But in the phase of where I was called for suspect action,
[Guest]: I remember the actual day when the announcement was made.
[Guest]: I found out on TV, which was terrible.
[Guest]: I mean, I remember being really angry at the media.
[Guest]: You know, usually you guys don't cover women's cricket at all.
[Guest]: Now you're putting it on the headlines just because
[Guest]: I've been called for a suspect action.
[Guest]: I found myself really angry at the media
[Guest]: because, you know, there was this little bit of a stigma
[Guest]: around suspect actions before,
[Guest]: whereas now it's looked at more holistically.
[Guest]: You know, people don't think Sunil Narayan is a bad person
[Guest]: because he had a suspect action,
[Guest]: whereas there was a little bit of a stigma around, you know, cheating
[Guest]: and all those kind of things around suspect actions a little further back.
[Guest]: And therefore, it was almost like I was being portrayed on TV as a villain.
[Guest]: And I really remember resenting that.
[Guest]: I really remember being distressed, watching the news
[Guest]: and seeing myself on the 8 o'clock news in the sports section.
[Guest]: I'm like, come on, when India do well at the World Cup,
[Guest]: you don't highlight us there.
[Guest]: And now when there's some kind of infamy,
[Guest]: immediately you guys wake up.
[Guest]: So I remember that.
[Guest]: It was during a national camp at Bangalore.
[Guest]: So in that sense, I had immediate support.
[Guest]: I remember Sandeep Patil was the director of the NCA.
[Guest]: The next day he called me into his office
[Guest]: and he told me, you'll be fine in six months.
[Guest]: I said, I'm going to be fine in three.
[Guest]: And that determination was there.
[Guest]: It was a near miss kind of a situation.
[Guest]: They take you to a lab.
[Guest]: This lab happened to be in Perth, Australia,
[Guest]: where they put electrodes on your arm and you're asked to bowl.
[Guest]: Not electrodes, but they put those fluorescent dots
[Guest]: which basically show up on a particular type of camera.
[Guest]: And that camera tells you that roughly
[Guest]: this ball angle was this much, this ball angle was this much.
[Guest]: If the permissible limit is 15 degrees,
[Guest]: my average was about 17 degrees.
[Guest]: So I believed that it's just a minor adjustment
[Guest]: that needs to be made.
[Guest]: Strength levels need to be improved to make sure
[Guest]: that the arm isn't taking that much of the load.
[Guest]: Some technical adjustments were made
[Guest]: in getting my action slightly more round
[Guest]: so as to not go past vertical,
[Guest]: which can lead to that.
[Guest]: On top of that, I have a naturally hyperextended elbow.
[Guest]: Not as much as the Muralis or the Shoaibs,
[Guest]: but this is something that's fairly common
[Guest]: in subcontinental bodies and especially
[Guest]: slightly taller, longer bodies.
[Guest]: So therefore, the optical impression is just enhanced
[Guest]: when you're watching an action with the naked eye.
[Guest]: So the immediate support was good
[Guest]: because the coaches within that camp,
[Guest]: we sat down, we kind of chalked out a plan.
[Guest]: The months after that, it did take six months eventually,
[Guest]: despite my determination and young bullishness.
[Guest]: But the months after that were difficult.
[Guest]: I remember and really appreciate
[Guest]: some of the Indian team players checking in,
[Guest]: but I had zero idea who to talk to
[Guest]: about the BCCI about this.
[Guest]: I had zero idea who to talk to
[Guest]: about my state association about this.
[Guest]: I kept asking them for answers.
[Guest]: Okay, when is there going to be an assessment?
[Guest]: What is going to happen?
[Guest]: What are the next steps?
[Guest]: And there was very little communication.
[Guest]: Eventually, there was a review a few months down the line.
[Guest]: Then once we were all confident,
[Guest]: there was another review at the ICC level.
[Guest]: Everything was fine.
[Guest]: Action back into legal status and bowling action cleared.
[Guest]: But in that time, I could not bowl for my state.
[Guest]: So I was playing for my state as a batter.
[Guest]: And this was the tricky period
[Guest]: because then at one point,
[Guest]: I lost my spot in the state team as well,
[Guest]: which, you know, absolutely zero concept of,
[Guest]: okay, now you're out of the team.
[Guest]: You'll still be supported.
[Guest]: You can still come to training.
[Guest]: We'll still help you with that
[Guest]: because you are a valuable member of the state side.
[Guest]: You've been with the state side for the last five, six years.
[Guest]: And like absolutely zero, no such support.
[Guest]: It was a very much friend for yourself kind of a situation.
[Guest]: A situation where you are shown who your real friends are.
[Guest]: But eventually, I mean, just through sheer determination
[Guest]: and sticking to the kind of processes
[Guest]: that we had mapped out in that first camp
[Guest]: as to how we can fix it
[Guest]: and working with the coach
[Guest]: while I was out of the camp as well.
[Guest]: Again, correcting one of the mistakes of the past.
[Guest]: I got back and I mean,
[Guest]: I'm pretty proud of the second half of that career.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't say my career petered out
[Guest]: because I had some of my best years with Maharashtra after that.
[Guest]: Yes, I didn't play for India again,
[Guest]: but I captained India A.
[Guest]: My last professional game was playing for India A against New Zealand.
[Guest]: So I was very close to breaking back into the Indian team.
[Guest]: So that part of the journey was difficult,
[Guest]: but at the same time rewarding
[Guest]: because like you said,
[Guest]: you have to learn from these kind of things
[Guest]: and sometimes only when these kind of things happen,
[Guest]: do you learn.
[Guest]: So there was definitely a change in my approach towards fitness,
[Guest]: towards professionalism also.
[Guest]: The situation in my Western Railway office
[Guest]: also improved somewhat
[Guest]: where I can be away from work a lot more than I could.
[Guest]: So that helped and I could train a lot more
[Guest]: with the coaches and get the kind of match experience that I needed.
[Guest]: And I mean,
[Guest]: some of my best spells were in those 2014-2015 years
[Guest]: and I retired in 2015.
[Guest]: I had, like I said,
[Guest]: just made it to India A,
[Guest]: felt like I was one step away from,
[Guest]: one good performance away from making it back to the Indian team.
[Guest]: But again,
[Guest]: didn't get selected into the Indian team after that India A game
[Guest]: and no idea about what women's cricket looks like
[Guest]: for the next rest of the year.
[Guest]: After that series,
[Guest]: what's going to happen?
[Guest]: Even that series was announced so last minute
[Guest]: that I remember coming into that camp completely unprepared
[Guest]: because we thought we were heading into an off-season
[Guest]: and suddenly New Zealand is visiting.
[Guest]: That kind of situation.
[Guest]: No idea when India is going to play next.
[Guest]: No idea what to kind of build up to
[Guest]: besides a vague target of,
[Guest]: you know, the 2017 World Cup.
[Guest]: And this situation where there was a lot of uncertainty.
[Guest]: So the question is,
[Guest]: do I want to then, at the age of 28, 29,
[Guest]: do I want to continue and give it another couple of years
[Guest]: with an excruciating amount of hard work
[Guest]: that had gone into those last couple of years
[Guest]: which were leading to good performances?
[Guest]: Do I want to do that all over again?
[Guest]: Again, with the uncertainty
[Guest]: whether I will play for India or not.
[Guest]: Close to 30 selectors usually prefer younger bowlers,
[Guest]: younger players at that point,
[Guest]: arbitrariness of selection and those kind of things.
[Guest]: Or whether do I want to give myself some time to
[Guest]: look to build a second career.
[Guest]: And I knew that because I was going to quit railways,
[Guest]: I had to make a living somehow, some other way.
[Guest]: And therefore whether that is the right time
[Guest]: to think about giving myself time to do that.
[Guest]: And eventually I decided on the latter.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, that feels like an absolutely agonizing decision.
[Amit Varma]: Do you sometimes look back and wonder
[Amit Varma]: had you stayed in the game,
[Amit Varma]: could things have been different?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you could have been part of the 2017 team, for example.
[Amit Varma]: Especially if you were bowling at your best
[Amit Varma]: at that point in time.
[Amit Varma]: Is that a thought that stays with you?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I guess it wouldn't come so much
[Amit Varma]: because you are extremely successful in what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: But that may not have been the case.
[Amit Varma]: So is that a thought that sometimes comes to you,
[Amit Varma]: the counterfactual?
[Guest]: No, I mean, I think about it.
[Guest]: But I don't regret that decision at that time.
[Guest]: There was also an element of, you know,
[Guest]: having played cricket despite being only 28-29,
[Guest]: having played cricket for 15 years
[Guest]: and at the same time remembering and knowing
[Guest]: because of my, I suppose, family background
[Guest]: and this constant awareness that, you know,
[Guest]: there is something beyond the railways
[Guest]: that there are other things that can
[Guest]: give me a lot of happiness which are out there.
[Guest]: I didn't know what those things were.
[Guest]: Also a determination to stay connected to cricket.
[Guest]: That, you know, even though I will no longer be playing cricket,
[Guest]: I'll still be doing something or the other in the game
[Guest]: because, I mean, that is the primary skill I had
[Guest]: at, you know, the stage where I'm retiring.
[Guest]: Again, zero idea what I will do.
[Guest]: Also, those last few years,
[Guest]: even though they were successful in terms of
[Guest]: what I was getting out,
[Guest]: they demanded more and more in terms of
[Guest]: what I had to put in.
[Guest]: As a fast bowler, there are always going to be
[Guest]: a few injuries here and there
[Guest]: towards those last year or so,
[Guest]: I had developed this weird pain in my ankles
[Guest]: where, you know, after every game,
[Guest]: I had to put both my feet in a bucket of ice.
[Guest]: So, those are all things which were kind of
[Guest]: building up and contributing to that decision.
[Guest]: And it's a hard life as a fast bowler,
[Guest]: as a player who is, you know,
[Guest]: fully committedly professional in an environment
[Guest]: which is giving you no guarantee of results.
[Guest]: And so, therefore, I don't have any regrets, you know.
[Guest]: I don't think, oh, whatever I had been
[Guest]: at the 2017 World Cup,
[Guest]: because I was at the 2017 World Cup
[Amit Varma]: in another capacity.
[Guest]: So, in a way, I don't feel like
[Guest]: I've disconnected from the game or given up the game.
[Guest]: I just feel like I've switched teams.
[Guest]: And so, I don't have regrets about
[Guest]: how things happened.
[Guest]: There's also a recognition that,
[Guest]: like I said, I was a very different person
[Guest]: from, you know, the people you'd usually find
[Guest]: at the women's cricket level,
[Guest]: where people would think, you know,
[Guest]: the railway job is never something you quit.
[Guest]: Whereas, I have no doubt in my mind
[Guest]: that this is something I'm not going to do
[Guest]: because I knew I could do other things.
[Guest]: So, a lot of people ask me,
[Guest]: why didn't you take up coaching after you quit?
[Guest]: Because I knew that, you know,
[Guest]: everyone can do coaching,
[Guest]: but very few people can do what I do
[Guest]: with the communication skills that I have,
[Guest]: with the language skills that I have.
[Guest]: And so, I knew that I had the opportunity
[Guest]: to contribute in different ways
[Guest]: because I had already gotten a taste of that
[Guest]: while I was playing.
[Guest]: So, like thinking about,
[Guest]: I never think about the counterfactual.
[Guest]: I don't think about, you know,
[Guest]: that entire time at the 2017 World Cup,
[Guest]: not once did I think,
[Guest]: oh my God, this could have been me.
[Guest]: But on the other hand, I was thinking,
[Guest]: oh my God, wow, I'm here.
[Amit Varma]: Fabulous. We'll take a quick commercial break
[Amit Varma]: and when we come back on the other side,
[Amit Varma]: we'll actually talk about your life after cricket,
[Amit Varma]: which to me, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: is also incredibly inspiring
[Amit Varma]: and a lot to learn from this.
[Amit Varma]: So, we'll take a quick commercial break before that.
[Amit Varma]: People often say,
[Amit Varma]: hey, cricket is not such a big sport.
[Amit Varma]: Only a few countries take it seriously.
[Amit Varma]: Well, let me put it like this.
[Amit Varma]: If you were to gather all the cricket fans in the world
[Amit Varma]: and make a country out of them,
[Amit Varma]: Cricketistan would be one of the biggest countries in the world.
[Amit Varma]: And the national app of Cricketistan
[Amit Varma]: would be the co-sponsor of this episode, Crick Heroes.
[Amit Varma]: For any casual cricketer or cricket fan,
[Amit Varma]: Crick Heroes is the final piece of the puzzle
[Amit Varma]: as far as cricket apps are concerned.
[Amit Varma]: Look, the other apps and websites
[Amit Varma]: will give you information, features, data,
[Amit Varma]: but you'll be a passive consumer of big events.
[Amit Varma]: Crick Heroes makes you a participant.
[Amit Varma]: Are you a recreational cricketer
[Amit Varma]: who wishes there was a record of your performances?
[Amit Varma]: Well, Crick Heroes allows players everywhere
[Amit Varma]: to record their scorecards in real time.
[Amit Varma]: Every match, even a gully match if you want.
[Amit Varma]: You can track the arc of your own career.
[Amit Varma]: And you can track your friends.
[Amit Varma]: You can trade cricket-related goods and services
[Amit Varma]: with them in the Crick Heroes marketplace.
[Amit Varma]: You might even find a coach there.
[Amit Varma]: 10 million people use Crick Heroes.
[Amit Varma]: What's more, so do 38 national boards across the world
[Amit Varma]: and many state boards in India
[Amit Varma]: so that they can track every game that happens.
[Amit Varma]: No talent left behind.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to crickheroes.in
[Amit Varma]: and download Crick Heroes now.
[Amit Varma]: If you love cricket, you'll love Crick Heroes.
[Amit Varma]: And I had discovered this technique
[Amit Varma]: where by squeezing it a lot
[Amit Varma]: and releasing it just as, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whatever I could impart great forward spin,
[Amit Varma]: which made it really fast, right?
[Amit Varma]: So Dravid came over once to play with us
[Amit Varma]: and I bowled him.
[Amit Varma]: My first ball, I was trying, you know,
[Amit Varma]: kind of a backward spin kind of thing.
[Amit Varma]: And that was a wide.
[Amit Varma]: Next two balls, he was clean bowled.
[Amit Varma]: In exasperation, he called me Shoaib Akhtar
[Amit Varma]: and said, I can't play against you.
[Amit Varma]: But the irony was that it was all finger spin.
[Amit Varma]: There was no chucking involved.
[Amit Varma]: But leaving that aside
[Amit Varma]: and in case I gave the impression
[Amit Varma]: that I also play cricket,
[Amit Varma]: I'd be absolutely useless in a field.
[Amit Varma]: So kind of moving on from your cricketing career,
[Amit Varma]: like one of the things that I'm actually excited
[Amit Varma]: talking about is this next part
[Amit Varma]: because I have been thinking a lot in recent months
[Amit Varma]: about creators in general,
[Amit Varma]: about things like teaching,
[Amit Varma]: about things like how do you achieve excellence
[Amit Varma]: in what you do?
[Amit Varma]: And there are just so many dimensions
[Amit Varma]: to things that you've done in this period
[Amit Varma]: in terms of writing,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of starting a YouTube channel
[Amit Varma]: and making that work,
[Amit Varma]: in terms of coaching
[Amit Varma]: and not just coaching cricket,
[Amit Varma]: but also coaching sports journalism
[Amit Varma]: and in terms of doing commentary
[Amit Varma]: in two different languages.
[Amit Varma]: So let's start with what actually came first,
[Amit Varma]: which I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, after your cricketing career was done,
[Amit Varma]: you know, where did you go next?
[Amit Varma]: What happened next?
[Amit Varma]: How were you thinking
[Amit Varma]: of what you want to do from now on?
[Guest]: So writing came first
[Guest]: and it happened in parallel
[Guest]: with kind of the second half
[Guest]: of my cricket career.
[Guest]: There was this,
[Guest]: like, since school,
[Guest]: okay, so maybe I should go
[Guest]: a little further back.
[Guest]: When I was in,
[Guest]: like I said,
[Guest]: I changed schools at one point.
[Guest]: The first school that I was in
[Guest]: where we were living with the joint family
[Guest]: was a convent.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: it is this fairly prestigious convent,
[Guest]: this really old school,
[Guest]: which has been around since my parents' time.
[Guest]: My mother went to that school.
[Guest]: My father went to the school next to it,
[Guest]: which is a boys' convent.
[Amit Varma]: Which school was this?
[Guest]: St. Joseph's.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: St. Joseph's Pashan,
[Guest]: and next door is Loyola's,
[Guest]: where my father went
[Guest]: and St. Joseph's was where my mother went.
[Guest]: And they wanted me to get admission.
[Guest]: And, you know,
[Guest]: the whole convent colonial obsession
[Guest]: with their language,
[Guest]: you know, you should be able to speak good English
[Guest]: from nursery,
[Guest]: otherwise you won't get admission kind of situation,
[Guest]: created an environment at home
[Guest]: where we were speaking a lot of English.
[Guest]: So despite being a Marathi family,
[Guest]: despite being a family where,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: my grandparents had most of their education in Marathi,
[Guest]: we were speaking a lot of English at home,
[Guest]: mainly to get me into the habit of speaking in English
[Guest]: so I would fit into a convent school.
[Guest]: Due to that fact,
[Guest]: I've always had good English speaking skills.
[Guest]: So therefore,
[Guest]: I always enjoyed English throughout school.
[Guest]: And when I,
[Guest]: and I tried my hand at kind of writing
[Guest]: throughout school, you know,
[Guest]: small limericks, poems,
[Guest]: not going to compete with your level of limericks,
[Guest]: but the point being that
[Guest]: I was dabbling around with the written form
[Guest]: before I ever conceived,
[Guest]: could conceive that, you know,
[Guest]: I might make a living from it.
[Guest]: So I had this fondness for writing
[Guest]: even though I had never actually written much.
[Guest]: But during my years in Mumbai,
[Guest]: I actually started writing blog.
[Guest]: I started writing a blog
[Guest]: and would write about pretty much anything that came to me.
[Guest]: Some of my oldest entries were,
[Guest]: you know, what we would now identify as listicles,
[Guest]: vague philosophical ramblings on, you know,
[Guest]: the meaning of sport and winning and losing
[Guest]: and that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: Eventually, I started writing about cricket also,
[Guest]: started writing about cricket more frequently,
[Guest]: started a separate blog just for my writing on cricket.
[Guest]: So the previous blog could have been anything,
[Guest]: book reviews, song reviews,
[Guest]: you know, what this song meant to me, that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: But this blog was more about
[Guest]: what I was thinking about the game.
[Guest]: I discovered Twitter around that time,
[Guest]: probably 2013, 13-ish,
[Guest]: and discovered that, you know,
[Guest]: there are people abroad who are dedicated women's cricket writers
[Guest]: and are writing blogs about their women's cricket
[Guest]: so as to give it more and more attention
[Guest]: and that kind of things.
[Guest]: And I thought, hey, that's something I can do.
[Guest]: I can, you know, write blogs about domestic cricket,
[Guest]: which no one ever talks about and no one ever covers.
[Guest]: Everyone knows Jhulan Goswami, everyone knows Mithali Raj.
[Guest]: Okay, fine, good.
[Guest]: By now, you know, BCCI has taken over women's cricket
[Guest]: and these people are slightly more famous
[Guest]: than they were maybe 10 years ago.
[Guest]: But domestic cricket, no one talks about us.
[Guest]: So I started doing reviews of tournaments
[Guest]: or, you know, previews of the season.
[Guest]: I started writing that kind of stuff on my blog
[Guest]: and putting it up on Twitter.
[Guest]: Eventually, someone picked it up.
[Guest]: Vision India reached out saying that
[Guest]: we would like you to write for us.
[Guest]: And at that time, I was, like, so absolutely naive.
[Guest]: Zero idea about how to have conversations about money.
[Guest]: I wrote my first probably 10-odd articles for them.
[Guest]: Didn't even ask for any money.
[Guest]: And later, you know, the good people at Vision India
[Guest]: reached out to me,
[Guest]: Hey, have you received your payment for this kind of thing?
[Guest]: Like, no, no, no, no, I haven't.
[Guest]: So that was happening in parallel while I was playing cricket.
[Guest]: My blog for Vision India ran in that period.
[Guest]: I was actually writing some kind of anti-BCCI stuff.
[Guest]: I mean, I don't mean to be anti-BCCI,
[Guest]: but I was writing about, you know,
[Guest]: how women's cricket has changed,
[Guest]: some for the better and some for the worse,
[Guest]: while I was playing.
[Guest]: Which is kind of, yeah, which is kind of,
[Guest]: I didn't even, like I said, I was just so naive
[Guest]: that I never even appreciated
[Guest]: that there may be consequences for this kind of thing.
[Guest]: Also, because it was such a small thing,
[Guest]: I was like, no chance anyone of import is actually reading this.
[Guest]: So it's okay.
[Guest]: And then I was finding a sense of satisfaction
[Guest]: and purpose through that.
[Guest]: Because again, like I said, you know,
[Guest]: everyone can do coaching,
[Guest]: but very few people were actually,
[Guest]: very few cricketers.
[Guest]: I don't think anyone else.
[Guest]: I may be wrong, but I don't think anyone else
[Guest]: was actually writing about the game
[Guest]: while they were playing the game.
[Guest]: And in this sense,
[Guest]: I was kind of being inspired in a way
[Guest]: by what was going on in other countries
[Guest]: where, you know, blogging about niche game
[Guest]: is a very big and mainstream thing in its own right.
[Guest]: There will be any, pick any like niche game.
[Guest]: And I don't know why chess is coming to mind.
[Guest]: I don't want to say chess right now.
[Guest]: But lawn bowls.
[Guest]: I'm sure there are very active blogs about lawn bowls
[Guest]: and very active communities about lawn bowls in,
[Guest]: for example, maybe Australia.
[Guest]: So I was kind of following the leads of these kind of communities
[Guest]: and writing and putting my stuff out on Twitter
[Guest]: and finding that, oh, this is interesting.
[Guest]: So after I quit,
[Guest]: like having no plan when I quit,
[Guest]: but after I quit, one of the first things that I did was
[Guest]: I reached out to some people within the media saying that,
[Guest]: hey, this is what I've done before.
[Guest]: Would you be interested in hosting these kind of articles?
[Guest]: And they said yes.
[Guest]: And they said, OK, we'll pay you X amount of money for each article
[Guest]: and you write X amount of articles per month.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, I can make some money here.
[Guest]: It was not a lot of money, but it was,
[Guest]: I had never been able to conceive that, you know,
[Guest]: I might be able to support myself financially
[Guest]: or even start of supporting myself financially
[Guest]: through writing about cricket.
[Guest]: I think this is cool.
[Guest]: And so I started writing about cricket.
[Guest]: I started discovering that, you know,
[Guest]: rather than just writing from home,
[Guest]: you can travel and cover tournaments.
[Guest]: And there is something called accreditation
[Guest]: where you become an actual member of the media
[Guest]: when you gain that accreditation,
[Guest]: which is basically a pass for a media person
[Guest]: to cover a particular tournament.
[Guest]: And then this very interesting little journey happened
[Guest]: before the accreditation.
[Guest]: No, actually, at that point,
[Guest]: I had received accreditation and covered a 2016 T20 World Cup,
[Guest]: covered a couple of women's games in that tournament.
[Guest]: So that was my first ever assignment
[Guest]: as a written journalist, you know,
[Guest]: where I'm actually at the ground.
[Guest]: I'm in a press box.
[Guest]: Oh, so this is what a press box is like.
[Guest]: You know, the heroes have kind of changed.
[Guest]: Rather than wanting to run into Jhulan Goswami,
[Guest]: I'm running into Osman Samiuddin.
[Guest]: Oh, my God, I read his work.
[Guest]: He's sitting right here.
[Guest]: That is so cool.
[Guest]: Those kind of moments I'm having.
[Guest]: Then I have this little bit of a journey.
[Guest]: The women's Big Bash has begun.
[Guest]: Indians are going to be playing in it for the first time.
[Guest]: Harbin Preet Kaur and Smriti Mandana.
[Guest]: I figure I have a few friends in Australia.
[Guest]: There are going to be Indians in Australia.
[Guest]: There's going to be no one else really covering it from India.
[Guest]: Why don't I travel and see if I can cover this tournament
[Guest]: on my own, like totally freelance.
[Guest]: Reached out to a few people saying,
[Guest]: hey, will you guys be interested in articles?
[Guest]: It was nowhere near, you know,
[Guest]: the cost of covering my trip.
[Guest]: It was still going to be significantly out of pocket.
[Guest]: But at the same time, because I was able to live with friends,
[Guest]: I wasn't really incurring as much cost as I might have.
[Guest]: And I went to Australia for a couple of months.
[Guest]: And I went to Brisbane.
[Guest]: I went to Melbourne.
[Guest]: I went to Sydney.
[Guest]: And I just experienced that tournament as a journalist.
[Guest]: I wasn't writing about it every day.
[Guest]: But I would go to every game.
[Guest]: I would sit in the designated area,
[Guest]: which is called, which is, you know,
[Guest]: what they pass for a press box.
[Guest]: Because these are small community games.
[Guest]: The WBBL is not as big a tournament as it was before.
[Guest]: I also happen to be around at the same time
[Guest]: the Australian Open is being played.
[Guest]: So I visit the Australian Open for the first time.
[Guest]: So there is this exposure to a wider sporting experience
[Guest]: and a different culture, a culture in the country,
[Guest]: which is sports mad, which really,
[Guest]: which really, I wouldn't say it was like a pivotal moment,
[Guest]: but it was a moment of broadening of my horizons.
[Guest]: Because I'd been to Australia before.
[Guest]: I'd been to Australia three times as a player.
[Guest]: But you're a player, you're staying in a hotel,
[Guest]: you're going from a team bus,
[Guest]: you're going to a ground, coming back from a team bus,
[Guest]: you're coming back here far, you know,
[Guest]: at most you're going to a little bit of sightseeing at the end of it.
[Guest]: Whereas here I was mapping out my own directions,
[Guest]: budgeting my own trip,
[Guest]: figuring out what my travel schedule should be,
[Guest]: booking my own flights.
[Guest]: The entire experience was just so educational.
[Guest]: And in terms of opening up,
[Guest]: the WBPL is like one of the best run women's leagues in the world.
[Guest]: So opening up to the possibilities of, you know,
[Guest]: what women's cricket holds,
[Guest]: that was a brilliant experience.
[Guest]: And I still have no idea how I actually conceived of it
[Guest]: and actually went ahead and did it.
[Guest]: If I think about it now, I don't know if I'll do that.
[Guest]: But yeah, it was just such a new experience.
[Guest]: At every step I'm discovering literally something new.
[Guest]: For example, there are separate cycling tracks in Australia
[Guest]: for only cyclists.
[Guest]: You know, the small, small things which blow your mind.
[Guest]: Or the fact that the trails here are so well marked.
[Guest]: Or the cricket here is so well done.
[Guest]: You know, they have a Christmas party.
[Guest]: Christmas, of course, in Australia, it's summer.
[Guest]: So they have a summer Christmas party on the ground
[Guest]: where after the match they open up the ground for the audience
[Guest]: and they have a band in the middle of the stadium
[Guest]: and everyone's playing Christmas carols on a cricket ground.
[Guest]: These are the kind of experiences which I would never have gotten
[Guest]: if I had not gone on that kind of trip.
[Guest]: And that was probably the first beginnings of my life
[Guest]: as a writer, as a sports journalist,
[Guest]: as a member of the written press, so to speak.
[Guest]: But, yeah, almost exploring this sporting landscape
[Guest]: in a way I had never done before.
[Guest]: As a player, the view is always very bracketed.
[Guest]: It's always very narrow.
[Guest]: And here I was trying to go as wide as I could.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And you kind of brought back memories of my own
[Amit Varma]: because I remember in 2006 I really wanted to cover India to Pakistan.
[Amit Varma]: And the typical way of doing that was
[Amit Varma]: that you get a freelance gig with an English newspaper
[Amit Varma]: because that covers your cost.
[Amit Varma]: So I got a gig writing pieces for The Guardian
[Amit Varma]: and I did some small audio thing for the BBC while I was there.
[Amit Varma]: And my whole thing was I just want to cover the cost of this tour.
[Amit Varma]: So it wasn't even like make a profit.
[Amit Varma]: Just cover the cost. You want to go, you want to watch the cricket,
[Amit Varma]: you want to soak in the experience.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of totally get that.
[Amit Varma]: I'm curious about craft here because, you know, one of the...
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want to embarrass you with praise,
[Amit Varma]: but, you know, where you are as a writer
[Amit Varma]: and sort of your work over the last year,
[Amit Varma]: you don't get there overnight.
[Amit Varma]: You don't get there.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it takes many, many years.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I look back on my own sort of progression as a cricket writer
[Amit Varma]: or many of the young writers that I've worked with
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, when you're young,
[Amit Varma]: you're trying so hard to impress.
[Amit Varma]: Sometimes you're overdoing the style, so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: It takes time for you to find your voice,
[Amit Varma]: to find the confidence, to find that...
[Amit Varma]: where you can just sit back and do what you have to do.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, how did that craft evolve in your case?
[Amit Varma]: Because I like... I have to apologize and say
[Amit Varma]: I haven't read your earlier pieces from when you started writing.
[Amit Varma]: I've just read what you've done over the last year or so.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fantastic.
[Amit Varma]: And there's one quality that I noted in your work
[Amit Varma]: that cuts across not just your writing,
[Amit Varma]: but also your YouTube work,
[Amit Varma]: which is that you're not trying to impress.
[Amit Varma]: It's very straightforward.
[Amit Varma]: It is what it is.
[Amit Varma]: There's no added artifice to that, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So is that, again, something that is kind of natural?
[Amit Varma]: Is there a moment where you say that
[Amit Varma]: you kind of have to work at that moment,
[Amit Varma]: if you get what I'm saying?
[Amit Varma]: So I'm very curious,
[Amit Varma]: like you did my writing course as well, for example.
[Amit Varma]: You're clearly a person who wants to get as much
[Amit Varma]: sort of exposure to different aspects of craft
[Amit Varma]: and thinking about writing.
[Amit Varma]: Take me a little bit through that journey of yours.
[Guest]: I think to answer this question,
[Guest]: I need to go back to my childhood.
[Amit Varma]: Please do, yeah, let's go back.
[Guest]: And I need to go back to...
[Guest]: I mean, my dad used to make regular trips to Mumbai at the time.
[Guest]: And we had this custom that,
[Guest]: you know, whenever he comes back from Mumbai,
[Guest]: the first question my younger brother and I would ask him,
[Guest]: what you got for us?
[Guest]: You know, he has to come back and he has to bring us a gift.
[Guest]: So, which still in our family is called
[Guest]: the what you got for us gift.
[Guest]: And very often those would be books.
[Guest]: Very often you would bring back
[Guest]: your Nancy Drews and your Hardy Boys.
[Guest]: There was no end of Enid Blyton's
[Guest]: littered around my childhood.
[Guest]: There was this memory of
[Guest]: spending so many months reading Lord of the Rings
[Guest]: and our entire family was reading it.
[Guest]: And it would be, you know, this,
[Guest]: it would just be situated in our bathroom
[Guest]: because unfortunately, we have a lot of people
[Guest]: who used to read while in the toilet.
[Guest]: And it is this kind of
[Guest]: maybe just an extension of that environment where English was emphasized at a young age.
[Guest]: Therefore, reading was also emphasized at a young age.
[Guest]: And I read exclusively fiction at the time.
[Guest]: I found non-fiction boring.
[Guest]: And it is interesting, recently someone put out a
[Guest]: quote on Twitter saying that, you know,
[Guest]: non-fiction greater than fiction.
[Guest]: I was like, yeah, maybe.
[Guest]: I mean, non-fiction might be what
[Guest]: what I read now and what I find really, you know,
[Guest]: helps me level up in whatever I'm doing.
[Guest]: But I spent my entire childhood reading exclusively fiction,
[Guest]: reading like fantasy,
[Guest]: a little bit of sci-fi here and there.
[Guest]: And maybe that's what ingrained a sense of storytelling in me
[Guest]: because I didn't, like I said,
[Guest]: I did a BSc after my graduation.
[Guest]: I played cricket for 15 years.
[Guest]: I have no formal education in writing.
[Guest]: My education is just my childhood,
[Guest]: my experiences, the fact that I like to read
[Guest]: and once in a while will, you know,
[Guest]: take the effort of reading an autobiography.
[Guest]: And those are the kind of books that interested me at the time.
[Guest]: So the evolution of the craft definitely
[Guest]: starts from the reading habit,
[Guest]: which is just a part of my childhood.
[Guest]: And again, unconsciously has helped me in
[Guest]: being a writer and being someone who is able to
[Guest]: make a living from writing today.
[Guest]: And beyond that,
[Guest]: I remember reading a lot.
[Guest]: Like I said, that phase when I discovered Twitter
[Guest]: and suddenly discovered, oh, there's so much to read.
[Guest]: And I suddenly discovered that there are so many
[Guest]: writers who write about cricket and think about cricket.
[Guest]: And like I said, they have from the media
[Guest]: a very different background and a very different view.
[Guest]: And me as a player, I'm reading that view.
[Guest]: And suddenly I think, oh, their view is so much,
[Guest]: I wouldn't say wider or larger, but just different.
[Guest]: It's just so different as someone in the media
[Guest]: and someone as a writer and really good pieces
[Guest]: of cricket writing at the time.
[Guest]: And again, most of my reading has been restricted to cricket.
[Guest]: And this is something I'm consciously trying to do nowadays,
[Guest]: is read more about other sports and whatnot.
[Guest]: But at the time, Osman Samiuddin,
[Guest]: Andrew Fidel Fernando,
[Guest]: Jared Kimbers writing some really funny, irreverent stuff.
[Guest]: All those are kind of probably influencing that.
[Guest]: Very early on, I remembered this or I discovered this quote,
[Guest]: which is copy technique, not style.
[Guest]: And I actually started doing that.
[Guest]: I was like, OK, this person has written this nice piece.
[Guest]: What technique are they using here?
[Guest]: Not consciously, but unconsciously.
[Guest]: I wasn't actually trying to name the technique.
[Guest]: I was just trying to say, OK, can I write a piece
[Guest]: which is something similar to what this person is writing?
[Guest]: And, you know, for the longest part,
[Guest]: I had no idea what these official journalistic terms were.
[Guest]: I had no idea what an opinion piece was.
[Guest]: I had no idea the difference between a feature and a report,
[Guest]: and a reported piece.
[Guest]: I had no idea what a newspeg was.
[Guest]: Again, these are words that I discovered
[Guest]: when I kind of got into the field
[Guest]: and I had to kind of overcome my ignorance and ask,
[Guest]: what is a newspeg?
[Guest]: And, you know, those are the kind of things,
[Guest]: those are the ways I learned.
[Guest]: Being a freelancer had its advantages
[Guest]: in terms of being kind of on the outside
[Guest]: and not being insulated into any one environment.
[Guest]: At the same time, I missed out, I think,
[Guest]: on these constant exposure to these really good writers,
[Guest]: which I think sometimes being in an organization gives you.
[Guest]: But, and it is funny, I mean,
[Guest]: in the process of building out my sports journalism course,
[Guest]: I read out, I went back and read a few of my pieces.
[Guest]: And some of the pieces were like, yeah, OK, good, honest effort.
[Guest]: Some of the pieces were actually good.
[Guest]: I picked up some old pieces as examples of, you know,
[Guest]: writing that I had done, which worked well
[Guest]: and which kind of still holds up.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't call it talent,
[Guest]: but I would call it a culmination of the environment
[Guest]: where A, English was emphasized,
[Guest]: B, reading was emphasized,
[Guest]: C, education was kind of emphasized.
[Guest]: And then add into that my unique experiences in sport,
[Guest]: allowing me to kind of bring a viewpoint that others didn't
[Guest]: and therefore kind of giving me a point of difference in,
[Guest]: you know, amongst so many other bloggers.
[Guest]: No one was writing about women's domestic cricket.
[Guest]: No one was writing about, well, not no one,
[Guest]: but very few people were writing about women's cricket.
[Guest]: So therefore, when someone wrote about it,
[Guest]: even if it wasn't written really well,
[Guest]: people read it and people shared it.
[Guest]: And even if it is just like a report piece on just providing information,
[Guest]: people read, people shared it.
[Guest]: And therefore I got a little bit of a following on social media.
[Guest]: But honestly, it's only in the process of building out
[Guest]: this post-journalism course that I have really thought about
[Guest]: what makes me a good writer,
[Guest]: what works, what doesn't work,
[Guest]: what are the things I tend to use,
[Guest]: what are the writing devices I tend to use more,
[Guest]: what has contributed to how I have progressed as a writer so far.
[Guest]: Also, one other non-craft thing that is an essential element,
[Guest]: I think, of why I have succeeded as a writer
[Guest]: is being brave in terms of what I write.
[Guest]: Because, you know, I'm constantly almost towing that line,
[Guest]: being someone who is in the cricketing system,
[Guest]: but also sometimes having to criticize that same system.
[Guest]: But when in doubt, unlike, like I said,
[Guest]: my evolution as a person over the last few years has
[Guest]: reflected in my professional work as well,
[Guest]: where I have more often than not silenced that inner doubt
[Guest]: and been brave and tried to tell my truth,
[Guest]: if not the truth as I see it.
[Guest]: Those are actually two words which I try to remind myself of,
[Guest]: you know, courage and truth
[Guest]: are two things that I want to use in the content that I create.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned coaching and like one of the things I realized
[Amit Varma]: after I taught my writing course for a while,
[Amit Varma]: that it in a subtle way changed the way I looked at my own past writing as well,
[Amit Varma]: where perhaps unlike you, I mean, I might like some of my earlier work,
[Amit Varma]: but a lot of my earlier work were like cringemax.
[Amit Varma]: Like, what is this? What am I doing?
[Amit Varma]: I tell my students not to do this and I'm doing the exact same thing.
[Amit Varma]: And it just kind of sharpened the way I look at my own writing
[Amit Varma]: and sort of has that been a process with you
[Amit Varma]: through your multiple sort of coaching strengths,
[Amit Varma]: like, or rather your coaching lanes,
[Amit Varma]: like one lane, of course, is sports journalism and writing.
[Amit Varma]: There's another lane, which is cricket,
[Amit Varma]: where I was going through a bunch of your fabulous videos on batting.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And it's so intricate and so detailed and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And do you sometimes wish that you had been coached
[Amit Varma]: at the start of your career by someone like you?
[Guest]: Oh, yeah, absolutely. I mean, half of the expression
[Guest]: through the content right now is that, you know,
[Guest]: this information is now available.
[Guest]: Take it. Do something with it.
[Guest]: Yes. I mean, having had a career where, you know,
[Guest]: didn't really have this one fixed coach moving from influence to other influence.
[Guest]: It's not been the driving motivation of what I do,
[Guest]: but it's been a part of that.
[Guest]: It's been, you know, the thrill of being able to share this.
[Guest]: And rather than in a cricket academy,
[Guest]: it being learned, for example, the cricket coaching videos
[Guest]: in a cricket academy, 50 people learning it
[Guest]: or maybe 20 people learning it, the 50,000 people learning it.
[Guest]: That was a revolution in terms of, you know, the power of YouTube.
[Guest]: And I was lucky, fairly lucky enough that I could discover that power
[Guest]: pretty much accidentally and fairly early on in the whole creative journey.
[Guest]: In terms of the writing part, yes, absolutely.
[Guest]: Like I said, I've really started thinking about my writing now.
[Guest]: And therefore, I've tried to reverse engineer my own process,
[Guest]: which is instinctive.
[Guest]: Until now, I would just put words on the page
[Guest]: and then, you know, try and refine them.
[Guest]: It's a very crude process, but a very instinctive process.
[Guest]: A process kind of also driven in large part by emotion
[Guest]: because very often I'm not someone who's employed to write every day.
[Guest]: So therefore, I write when I feel like it.
[Guest]: And I have that, you know, again, a lucky situation where I have that.
[Guest]: So I was usually writing from a place of emotion.
[Guest]: I'm angry about this. I'm sad about this.
[Guest]: I'm happy about this. Wonderful match played.
[Guest]: Oh, this could have been better. I wish this was different.
[Guest]: Those kind of things usually came across in my writing.
[Guest]: And maybe that's one point of connect
[Guest]: and one point of, you know, why it has connected with so many people.
[Guest]: But in terms of the actual process now,
[Guest]: after having built out that course,
[Guest]: after having created a process which other people can take
[Guest]: and, you know, you can apply it to yourself and see if it works for you.
[Guest]: Now I follow that process.
[Guest]: Now I sit down and I go through my own processes
[Guest]: and see if I've met my own checklists
[Guest]: because this is literally how I've, you know,
[Guest]: it's absolutely like how a cricketer will
[Guest]: identify that this is your process,
[Guest]: results and processes, we talk about it.
[Guest]: When your hand comes this close to your ear,
[Guest]: the ball goes on off stump line.
[Guest]: When you tick X, Y, Z boxes in writing,
[Guest]: the piece is likely to come out better, cleaner, clearer,
[Guest]: like you constantly emphasize.
[Guest]: And therefore, that is something that I follow now.
[Guest]: Whereas before it was very instinctive.
[Guest]: And like a year ago, if you had asked me how you do it,
[Guest]: I would not have been able to tell you.
[Guest]: I would just like, I write when I'm angry.
[Guest]: That's what I would have said.
[Amit Varma]: A good reason to write among other reasons.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, one of the things that I kind of talk about in my course
[Amit Varma]: and I also draw a cricket metaphor from it
[Amit Varma]: is mindful learning and learning that you're just kind of taking by osmosis.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of cricket learning is mindful.
[Amit Varma]: If you go in the nets for the first time,
[Amit Varma]: you know, the way your feet are moving, your elbow,
[Amit Varma]: the balance of your body, all of that, you're mindful about it.
[Amit Varma]: Later, you internalize it completely
[Amit Varma]: and you don't need to actually think consciously about it.
[Amit Varma]: Now, in your case, the learning process seems to have been
[Amit Varma]: and again, a reading habit I keep saying is the best way to become a good writer.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of it seems to have come from osmosis just by reading a lot.
[Amit Varma]: You read a lot of great storytelling and then that translates into the way you write
[Amit Varma]: and you've picked up a lot of good habits without even realizing it.
[Amit Varma]: And that's not mindful.
[Amit Varma]: And then some of it is mindful, especially when we start teaching.
[Amit Varma]: You know, you start noticing that stuff mindfully
[Amit Varma]: or if you're studying a writer, you like you reverse engineer what they've done
[Amit Varma]: and you know, all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So like I keep reminding myself, though,
[Amit Varma]: I always say when it comes to reading that for me, there's no difference.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as long as you're reading, I don't care if it's mindful or otherwise,
[Amit Varma]: because if what you're reading is something that captivates you,
[Amit Varma]: you'll pick up things from it by osmosis.
[Amit Varma]: But do you feel that it helps to be more mindful
[Amit Varma]: that we should all be more mindful in terms of craft of the things that we do,
[Amit Varma]: whether it is something in a cricketing technique sense,
[Amit Varma]: whether it is something in a writing sense, you know, all of these things?
[Guest]: You know, it's funny.
[Guest]: You will try to be mine.
[Guest]: My recent experience has been I will try to be mindful about,
[Guest]: you know, reading or consuming any kind of content.
[Guest]: And, you know, I teach a multimedia journalism course.
[Guest]: So it's, you know, videos, podcasts, writing, that kind of thing.
[Guest]: So I keep saying that, you know, whatever content you consume,
[Guest]: you're going to pick up something from it.
[Guest]: And if you should try and actively do that,
[Guest]: even if it's, you know, watching your favorite Netflix show.
[Guest]: And a lot of these things just come
[Guest]: and express themselves in content so randomly.
[Guest]: Having not made notes,
[Guest]: at some point, something will strike me.
[Guest]: Like recently I wrote a piece on Ashwin
[Guest]: and I ended it with this line.
[Guest]: When is it okay to drop the alpha?
[Guest]: When the pack is stronger without him.
[Guest]: Yeah, a wolf reference.
[Guest]: So again, where did this line come from?
[Guest]: One of my sports journalism students asked me,
[Guest]: how did you come up with this line?
[Guest]: Game of Thrones.
[Guest]: And I was not mindfully watching Game of Thrones.
[Guest]: And, you know, that line in Game of Thrones where
[Guest]: the strength of the pack is the wolf and the strength of the wolf is the pack.
[Guest]: That's just what somehow popped up in my mind.
[Guest]: Okay, let's use a wolf reference, that kind of a thing.
[Guest]: I was not mindfully watching Game of Thrones,
[Guest]: but it turned up.
[Guest]: I don't know how, I don't know why, I can't really explain it.
[Guest]: So there have been instances where, you know,
[Guest]: stuff in my notes has really helped
[Guest]: improve the content that I have put out.
[Guest]: And there have been instances where, you know,
[Guest]: stuff just comes so randomly and that sticks with people.
[Guest]: So I would probably say it's a good habit to develop that mindful consumption.
[Guest]: But, I mean, who are we if we can really understand?
[Guest]: We're not going to pretend to understand how our brains work.
[Guest]: And just like at the subconscious level,
[Guest]: there is so much weird stuff happening.
[Guest]: And when it will be useful and when it will be harmful, God alone knows.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, well said. That makes a lot of sense.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of talk about your YouTubing now,
[Amit Varma]: because I was watching your video about that intimidating video
[Amit Varma]: I referred to at the beginning about doing commentary twice a day and all that.
[Amit Varma]: And at the beginning, there is this sequence,
[Amit Varma]: this montage where you're making filter coffee.
[Amit Varma]: And I straight away thought of Peter McKinnon,
[Amit Varma]: the YouTuber whose coffee montages are really famous.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what got you into try YouTubing.
[Amit Varma]: Did you intend to do cricket stuff or did you intend to do vloggy stuff?
[Amit Varma]: Who are the YouTubers that you kind of liked?
[Amit Varma]: What were the kind of values that you picked up mindfully from people?
[Amit Varma]: Like that whole coffee montage, I just looked at it
[Amit Varma]: and I thought she must have watched Peter McKinnon.
[Amit Varma]: So now you can confirm if that's true or not.
[Amit Varma]: Take me a bit through your early part of your YouTube journey as well.
[Guest]: I have watched Peter McKinnon,
[Guest]: but I must say that, you know, again,
[Guest]: this is the weird, unconscious, subconscious stuff that I'm talking about.
[Guest]: I am 100% sure that I did not think about Peter McKinnon
[Guest]: probably for a year or so,
[Guest]: even while I was making that coffee montage
[Guest]: before you brought up his name.
[Guest]: Like I watched his videos probably a long time ago.
[Guest]: But again, you know, subconsciously,
[Guest]: what all we internalize, God alone knows.
[Guest]: If someone can figure out the subconscious one day,
[Guest]: it will be a very big achievement.
[Guest]: But YouTube was a very interesting phase.
[Guest]: Again, I must emphasize that this was a phase
[Guest]: where I was receiving a lot of support from home.
[Guest]: Again, not having a regular job.
[Guest]: And I say that with air quotes.
[Guest]: Having quit my railway job, you know,
[Guest]: much to the consternation of my grandfather,
[Guest]: who still wants me to do engineering
[Guest]: and have a permanent job and a pension.
[Guest]: There was a tremendous amount of support from home.
[Guest]: I was back in Pune living with my parents.
[Guest]: And there was this space
[Guest]: to kind of, you know, figure it out yourself.
[Guest]: I went to Australia for a couple of months.
[Guest]: There was...
[Guest]: And therefore, I was in a phase of my life
[Guest]: where I had a lot of time.
[Guest]: You know, I was writing from time to time
[Guest]: and that kind of paid the bills.
[Guest]: But it was not my job.
[Guest]: I was not doing it every day.
[Guest]: So I had some time in my life
[Guest]: kind of figuring out what I was...
[Guest]: what I would like to do.
[Guest]: Briefly flirting with the idea of writing a book.
[Guest]: And then I...
[Guest]: This is one of my favorite stories in life
[Guest]: about, you know, what can lead you where.
[Guest]: Then I started playing Pokemon Go.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Again, you know, 90s kid
[Guest]: having grown up watching those cartoons
[Guest]: and Pokemon being one of those cartoons.
[Guest]: This game suddenly took over the world.
[Guest]: And I was like, okay, let's try it out.
[Guest]: And having no idea how to play it,
[Guest]: I randomly Googled
[Guest]: or maybe went on to YouTube
[Guest]: and tried to learn how to play it.
[Guest]: And this is the first time
[Guest]: I had consciously used YouTube to learn something.
[Guest]: Until that, you know, YouTube was a place
[Guest]: where I watched trailers once in a while
[Guest]: or YouTube was a place where
[Guest]: videos I was intentionally watching
[Guest]: happened to be hosted.
[Guest]: I didn't go on to YouTube
[Guest]: to actually watch something.
[Guest]: So this is the first time I'm on YouTube
[Guest]: and I'm watching this video
[Guest]: by a vlogger in the US.
[Guest]: His name is Nick. His channel's name is Trainer Tips.
[Guest]: And he's basically making daily vlogs
[Guest]: explaining his processes of playing Pokemon Go.
[Guest]: He's a Pokemon Go nerd.
[Guest]: And I'm like, oh, these videos are cool.
[Guest]: And I started playing Pokemon Go.
[Guest]: I keep watching his videos regularly.
[Guest]: He has this lovely vloggy style.
[Guest]: And I think, hey, maybe I should try that.
[Guest]: And that's literally how the YouTube channel started.
[Guest]: I made a few calls
[Guest]: and happened to get some advice
[Guest]: from the person who today is
[Guest]: the head of production for my YouTube channel.
[Guest]: And he basically told me use this camera,
[Guest]: use that camera.
[Guest]: This is fine. That is fine.
[Guest]: Just go and do it.
[Guest]: And yeah, I was kind of just imitating
[Guest]: what I was seeing on YouTube,
[Guest]: what I was seeing on,
[Guest]: what I was seeing other people do.
[Guest]: And at the time, I had just gotten a dog.
[Guest]: He was about a year old.
[Guest]: And therefore, I was spending a lot of time outdoors with him.
[Guest]: I thought, OK, let's...
[Guest]: And I'm an outdoor person. I like hiking.
[Guest]: I like going on any kind of
[Guest]: trip which is taking you closer to nature
[Guest]: and that kind of stuff.
[Guest]: Even like today, it's a big part of my life.
[Guest]: But I think maybe I can make a show about cricket
[Guest]: done outdoors.
[Guest]: You know, someone talking about cricket,
[Guest]: but doing it outdoors.
[Guest]: Just randomly trying to combine
[Guest]: whatever passions I have
[Guest]: in the most generic way possible.
[Guest]: So I started making vlogs.
[Guest]: If you go back to the first three videos on my channel,
[Guest]: they are vlogs where I'm exploring some place
[Guest]: and talking about cricket side by side.
[Guest]: And this is a time where, like I said,
[Guest]: I have a lot of time in my life.
[Guest]: Well, I have more time than I had time.
[Guest]: And therefore, I'm on YouTube learning.
[Guest]: I'm learning how to use a camera.
[Guest]: I'm on YouTube learning how to shoot.
[Guest]: I'm on YouTube, most of all,
[Guest]: most important of all,
[Guest]: learning how to edit my own videos.
[Guest]: Again, I am a BSc graduate
[Guest]: who played cricket for 15 years,
[Guest]: worked in a government office,
[Guest]: have zero idea about how all this technology works.
[Guest]: And suddenly YouTube is teaching me all of this.
[Guest]: I was like, oh, this is so cool.
[Guest]: And that process of learning
[Guest]: and implementing what I've learned,
[Guest]: it gives you a little bit of a high.
[Guest]: It gives you a little bit of a sense of satisfaction.
[Guest]: This is that, you know, A, it's so new.
[Guest]: Maybe everyone nowadays finds this very normal,
[Guest]: you know, having a YouTube channel and doing all this.
[Guest]: 2016, I remember going to the YouTube office and the head of YouTube,
[Guest]: India or head of YouTube sports,
[Guest]: I think head of YouTube India.
[Guest]: He's like, I remember in 2016-17,
[Guest]: you were the only channel who was doing this.
[Guest]: And it happened to be so.
[Guest]: I was, you know, happened to be one of the first people
[Guest]: who discovered that this process of learning
[Guest]: and this process of creating,
[Guest]: using what you've learned on YouTube is fun.
[Guest]: And so therefore, I was just doing it for fun.
[Guest]: And the fourth video I made,
[Guest]: I thought, let's OK, let's mix it up
[Guest]: and let's make a video on how to choose a bat.
[Guest]: So that was the first how to video I made.
[Guest]: And I made that video.
[Guest]: It's still in a vlog style
[Guest]: because that's what I liked to do.
[Guest]: And I still like it more than
[Guest]: hardcore tutorials.
[Guest]: But I made that video and it kind of exploded.
[Guest]: And suddenly my channel has 4000 subscribers.
[Guest]: I'm like, oh, there's something here.
[Guest]: So let me think about it.
[Guest]: Let me try and do it seriously.
[Guest]: And that's kind of how YouTube started.
[Amit Varma]: And you have, I think, more than 300,000 now
[Amit Varma]: or something like that.
[Guest]: Some 2,80,000 right now.
[Amit Varma]: 2,80,000. OK.
[Amit Varma]: So like one of the things I noted,
[Amit Varma]: which I alluded to earlier,
[Amit Varma]: but one of the things I noted about your YouTube
[Amit Varma]: as it is now from the recent videos that I watched
[Amit Varma]: is a lack of self-consciousness.
[Amit Varma]: Is that it's just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you're not overthinking it.
[Amit Varma]: You're not trying to be too stylized
[Amit Varma]: despite the filter coffee montage.
[Amit Varma]: It's almost like what you see is what you get.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, one of the sort of the things
[Amit Varma]: that I say that creators should pay more attention to
[Amit Varma]: and should cultivate.
[Amit Varma]: And that's an important quality.
[Amit Varma]: It's just authenticity in terms of
[Amit Varma]: being authentic to who you are.
[Amit Varma]: All the creators I enjoy listening to in podcasts
[Amit Varma]: or watching on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: are just authentic to who they are.
[Amit Varma]: You know, whatever the subject might be of the podcast
[Amit Varma]: or their particular video or whatever,
[Amit Varma]: I'm really watching it for them.
[Amit Varma]: I've kind of gotten a comfort level with them.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that's why I'm there.
[Amit Varma]: That's why I'm hooked.
[Amit Varma]: That's why I'm kind of going there.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, again, is this something
[Amit Varma]: that was there from the start
[Amit Varma]: or is it something that you kind of evolved to?
[Amit Varma]: Like, did you, was there a time
[Amit Varma]: where you were overthinking it?
[Amit Varma]: Was there a time where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you thought more stylistic takes were important
[Amit Varma]: or you just figured out that this is the easiest way
[Amit Varma]: to do it and not to overthink it
[Guest]: and so on and so forth?
[Guest]: I don't think that's completely what it is.
[Guest]: Like, for example,
[Guest]: that video that you mentioned,
[Guest]: the day in the life,
[Guest]: you know, it starts with me really bleary eyed.
[Amit Varma]: Exactly, you're not trying too hard
[Amit Varma]: to make yourself look good,
[Amit Varma]: which is great, which is...
[Guest]: Yeah, and in that video,
[Guest]: I was consciously doing that.
[Guest]: Like, literally, I decided first thing in the morning,
[Guest]: I'm going to film.
[Guest]: But while watching it back,
[Guest]: I was like, oh God, that looks so bad.
[Amit Varma]: No, I disagree.
[Guest]: And, you know, later on the video,
[Guest]: looking at it and thinking,
[Guest]: oh, there's like a weird,
[Guest]: curly hair sticking out here
[Guest]: and this should have been better
[Guest]: and that should have been better.
[Guest]: And when I'm filming,
[Guest]: I do try and present.
[Guest]: There is absolutely,
[Guest]: I mean, it's kind of become part of my job,
[Guest]: presenting, but at the same time,
[Guest]: not presenting too much.
[Guest]: If you meet me outside of YouTube,
[Guest]: I'm definitely going to talk differently.
[Guest]: I don't have...
[Guest]: I have a script,
[Guest]: for example, on YouTube.
[Guest]: Usually, I'll have a fair idea
[Guest]: of what I want to say.
[Guest]: I will do takes.
[Guest]: I'm not, you know,
[Guest]: this absolute authenticity person.
[Guest]: But at the same time,
[Guest]: as a person,
[Guest]: I'm not a person who worries a lot
[Guest]: about how I look.
[Guest]: I'm not a person who,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I've never been into makeup.
[Guest]: In fact, that's one of my worst,
[Guest]: that's one of the things I like the least
[Guest]: about having to sometimes work in TV
[Guest]: or in a studio.
[Guest]: The just uncomfortable amount of makeup
[Guest]: that they put on us.
[Guest]: I've never been someone who has,
[Guest]: you know, consciously gone out of the way
[Guest]: to dress in a certain way.
[Guest]: Usually, I'll just be most comfortable
[Guest]: in what I'm most comfortable.
[Guest]: And I think that comes across.
[Guest]: That comes across as,
[Guest]: you know, even stylistically of
[Guest]: I'm okay with a first thing in the morning shot
[Guest]: because that's what it's supposed to be.
[Guest]: It's a first thing in the morning shot.
[Guest]: But if it's supposed to be a shot
[Guest]: where I'm really trying to convey
[Guest]: a crisp, organized look,
[Guest]: which is still me,
[Guest]: I will do that.
[Guest]: I will put in the effort to
[Guest]: make sure that I am so presentable.
[Guest]: And there is a certain amount of,
[Guest]: I mean, off camera,
[Guest]: I'm slightly different,
[Guest]: but only slightly.
[Guest]: And that's probably the best way to describe it.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I know.
[Amit Varma]: I get what you're saying that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, like,
[Amit Varma]: even the intros to my podcast,
[Amit Varma]: like in this conversation,
[Amit Varma]: I'm just being me.
[Amit Varma]: But in the intro to my podcast,
[Amit Varma]: I am kind of presenting,
[Amit Varma]: but it's also kind of me.
[Amit Varma]: It's not contrived.
[Amit Varma]: That's a similar thing.
[Amit Varma]: So I get what you mean
[Amit Varma]: when you say you're presenting
[Amit Varma]: and you've got a script and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I get that.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't feel contrived.
[Guest]: I'm not trying to make it not feel contrived.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: While at the same time,
[Guest]: I'm not trying to make it, you know,
[Guest]: unless it's a vlog like that,
[Guest]: I'm not trying to make it
[Guest]: look completely casual either.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: I mean, I will pay more attention to the lighting
[Guest]: than I will to hairstyle.
[Guest]: That's me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's kind of remarkable
[Amit Varma]: because I think that kind of
[Amit Varma]: lack of self-consciousness is just great.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I'm also thinking of starting something on YouTube
[Amit Varma]: and that self-consciousness about
[Amit Varma]: just the physical aspect of it is,
[Amit Varma]: you know, kind of the biggest
[Amit Varma]: stumbling block, though I know that
[Amit Varma]: once I start and I get past it,
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of fine.
[Amit Varma]: But, you know, audio is easy that way.
[Amit Varma]: You don't really have to worry.
[Guest]: No, there I totally agree,
[Guest]: which is why, I mean,
[Guest]: you know, out of the commentary work that I do,
[Guest]: doing radio commentary is my favorite
[Guest]: because there it's not about
[Guest]: what you look like.
[Guest]: It's about what you know and how you say it.
[Guest]: And that is the probably
[Guest]: most natural form of commentary
[Guest]: that I've experienced.
[Guest]: And that is something that I really enjoy doing
[Guest]: purely for the reason that, you know,
[Guest]: you don't have to present visually.
[Guest]: You just need to present almost
[Guest]: intellectually and vocally.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about commentary.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: there are very different views
[Amit Varma]: of what good commentary is.
[Amit Varma]: Before satellite television kind of took over India,
[Amit Varma]: if you go back to the Ritchie Beno school of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: the Ritchie Beno school of thinking
[Amit Varma]: really is that the viewer can see
[Amit Varma]: what is happening on the screen.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to describe it.
[Amit Varma]: If you have something to say with that
[Amit Varma]: adds to that, say it.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, keep quiet.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know,
[Amit Varma]: the brief on Indian satellite television
[Amit Varma]: for the early group of commentators in the 90s
[Amit Varma]: was simply that don't let there be a quiet moment.
[Amit Varma]: So you kind of had to talk.
[Amit Varma]: You had to sort of fill all the space
[Amit Varma]: with the description and that
[Amit Varma]: there was a danger there
[Amit Varma]: that then you just get banal
[Amit Varma]: and, you know, all of those things kind of happen.
[Amit Varma]: So when you started doing commentary,
[Amit Varma]: what was the kind of brief you gave to yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Like, how does one define good commentary?
[Amit Varma]: And obviously, it's different on TV and radio
[Amit Varma]: because radio, the person isn't actually seeing the action.
[Amit Varma]: So you got to get into that as well.
[Amit Varma]: But what was your notion of commentary going in?
[Amit Varma]: How did it evolve?
[Amit Varma]: How did your style as a commentator evolve?
[Amit Varma]: And what did you find difficult?
[Amit Varma]: And what did you not find difficult, so to say?
[Guest]: So my first experience with commentary
[Guest]: was probably Australia,
[Guest]: where I went and, you know,
[Guest]: word got around that there's someone from India here.
[Guest]: And since there was subjects of interest
[Guest]: in terms of two Indian players,
[Guest]: ABC Radio wanted to get some perspective,
[Guest]: get the Indian perspective.
[Guest]: And that was the first time I put on a mic
[Guest]: and quite nervous.
[Guest]: Luckily, I had the role there of an expert.
[Guest]: So, you know, you would usually
[Guest]: describe commentators in two roles.
[Guest]: One is a caller and one is an expert,
[Guest]: where the caller is having to,
[Guest]: especially on radio, describe what happened
[Guest]: and the expert will have to
[Guest]: describe why it happened.
[Guest]: So the first few opportunities that I got were opportunities
[Guest]: which were usually, you know, in the break commentary
[Guest]: where I could just talk about
[Guest]: my experience with women's cricket.
[Guest]: And that felt fairly natural.
[Guest]: It felt fairly, you know, OK.
[Guest]: I know my stuff.
[Guest]: So therefore, I can put it across.
[Guest]: Like I said, I mean, communication in English
[Guest]: had always been a strength.
[Guest]: So this was just about overcoming
[Guest]: those initial butterflies of,
[Guest]: oh my God, your life
[Guest]: and getting started.
[Guest]: And once I got started, I used to usually get into the flow.
[Guest]: So that was how radio went.
[Guest]: When I went to TV for the first time,
[Guest]: this was, I got an opportunity to commentate
[Guest]: on a challenger trophy,
[Guest]: a women's challenger trophy.
[Guest]: First time commentating with the BCCI,
[Guest]: first time commentating
[Guest]: on something that is going up on TV
[Guest]: on a major channel like Star Sports.
[Guest]: There, the brief to myself was
[Guest]: play your role.
[Guest]: Again, usually I was only slotted as the expert
[Guest]: because inexperienced as a caller.
[Guest]: In India, the culture is kind of different in TV commentary.
[Guest]: The roles mix.
[Guest]: A former cricketer can be both expert and caller
[Guest]: depending on your position in the roster.
[Guest]: Usually, my role has been of the expert
[Guest]: being trying to add some layer of insight.
[Guest]: And that was probably one brief I had to myself
[Guest]: that, you know, if this is happening,
[Guest]: what is the background story?
[Guest]: And that's one area I worked really hard.
[Guest]: The whole journalistic training of, you know,
[Guest]: interviews, research,
[Guest]: really helped in that sense that
[Guest]: I remember that challenger trophy, in fact.
[Guest]: I got there a day before.
[Guest]: I tried to watch practice.
[Guest]: You know, I arranged to stay with a friend.
[Guest]: I hadn't actually got official accommodation that day.
[Guest]: But I arranged to stay with a friend,
[Guest]: watch practice.
[Guest]: The next night, once I checked into my official accommodation
[Guest]: which is the same hotel the players were staying,
[Guest]: I went around room to room
[Guest]: and sat the players down and had a chat with them.
[Guest]: What's your back story?
[Guest]: Where do you come from?
[Guest]: And especially the younger players
[Guest]: because I had been retired a couple of years.
[Guest]: There were players who I had not played with and against.
[Guest]: I didn't know their stories.
[Guest]: I had to make sure I knew their stories
[Guest]: because, like, I am the voice of these people.
[Guest]: I am the one who is responsible with telling their stories.
[Guest]: So I had to make sure I knew those stories.
[Guest]: So I went room to room chatting.
[Guest]: Like, Didi, up!
[Guest]: That kind of a, like, completely unscheduled, unannounced,
[Guest]: Hi, I am just going to take 15 minutes of your time and ask you about your life.
[Guest]: Kind of conversations.
[Unknown]: And that helped.
[Guest]: I mean, if you are caught on a moment
[Guest]: where, you know, the caller has thrown to you,
[Guest]: Snehal, tell us about this person.
[Guest]: And you don't know that comes across on TV
[Guest]: or on commentary as bad commentary.
[Guest]: It comes across that you are faking it.
[Guest]: And if you actually have done the research,
[Guest]: then you can tell the stories.
[Guest]: And that might have been the brief I gave to myself.
[Guest]: Is that, you know, A, it's your responsibility to tell these stories.
[Guest]: B, it's your responsibility to grow the game.
[Guest]: And that is kind of one of the things
[Guest]: that has driven a lot of my later career.
[Guest]: I mean, even one of the reasons I got into writing on women's cricket
[Guest]: and I did most of my early writing on women's cricket
[Guest]: was that no one was writing about women's cricket.
[Guest]: And I knew I could.
[Guest]: And I knew I could make an impact.
[Guest]: So the same kind of awareness while going into commentary
[Guest]: where if you do this well, it will help grow the game
[Guest]: in whatever small way.
[Guest]: They are the story.
[Guest]: They are the ones who are going to do it primarily.
[Guest]: I am just a storyteller.
[Guest]: That was kind of the brief I gave myself.
[Guest]: But I always had an awareness that, you know,
[Guest]: unless both those aspects are in sync,
[Guest]: the value of what is happening on the field
[Guest]: won't go across to the viewer or the listener.
[Amit Varma]: One kind of strand, one sense that I got through your writings
[Amit Varma]: and your videos and stuff was that
[Amit Varma]: much of the stuff that you did after actually retiring as a player
[Amit Varma]: was driven by your passion for women's cricket in India.
[Amit Varma]: Like you talk about how, you know, you loved coaching
[Amit Varma]: because, you know, you didn't get that coaching.
[Amit Varma]: And now all these girls have access to that coaching.
[Amit Varma]: Similarly, you know, writing about the women's game,
[Amit Varma]: nobody else is doing it, so you're doing it.
[Amit Varma]: Not just coaching cricket, also coaching sports journalism.
[Amit Varma]: You're also now not just writing about women's cricket,
[Amit Varma]: but just writing about cricket, you know,
[Amit Varma]: writing about cricket really, really well.
[Amit Varma]: So is that passion still sort of the single driving force
[Amit Varma]: that gets you into all of this?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you see yourself as a creator
[Amit Varma]: outside of someone who's come as a former player herself?
[Amit Varma]: Do you also see yourself as a creator?
[Amit Varma]: Like I noticed that you also got another sideways YouTube channel
[Amit Varma]: which is not about cricket coaching,
[Amit Varma]: which is just about vlogging.
[Amit Varma]: And you did a recent vlog about the trek you took and stuff.
[Amit Varma]: So, like, was it always the case that you thought that,
[Amit Varma]: oh, I'm a creator and I'll do these cricket things?
[Amit Varma]: Or were you driven into these things
[Amit Varma]: because of your passion for cricket?
[Amit Varma]: And then you kind of began to redefine and expand.
[Amit Varma]: So what's been your thought process
[Amit Varma]: and your sort of the way that you look at yourself?
[Guest]: I definitely think of myself as a creator,
[Guest]: but this creator would not exist
[Guest]: if that passion for women's cricket was not there.
[Guest]: I mean, that was the material that needed an outlet.
[Guest]: And that outlet happened to be, you know,
[Guest]: starting with writing and mostly the women's cricket stuff
[Guest]: has been conveyed through my writing.
[Guest]: YouTube has mostly been stuff where I enjoy this process of,
[Guest]: like I said, learning and then applying.
[Guest]: Similarly, learning and then sharing what you've learned
[Guest]: is also something that gives you a little bit of a kick
[Guest]: or gives me a little bit of a kick.
[Guest]: And I enjoy that process independent of women's cricket
[Guest]: or independent of my passion for cricket in general.
[Guest]: I mean, my passion for cricket is not completely,
[Guest]: how to say, indestructible.
[Guest]: Like there will be phases and there was a phase
[Guest]: just after the IPL after having done commentary almost every day
[Guest]: where I didn't want to watch cricket for one week.
[Guest]: But there I still might feel like, you know,
[Guest]: I might be able to make a video or I might be able to do other stuff.
[Guest]: So the passion for the subject definitely existed first
[Guest]: and then the outlet for it has probably defined me as a creator.
[Guest]: But if you ask me what I will want to and be passionate about creating,
[Guest]: it will always be something related to growing the game,
[Guest]: growing the women's game.
[Guest]: Like even now my storefront, you could say,
[Guest]: doesn't really have a lot of women's cricket.
[Guest]: You know, I might be writing on women's cricket, yes,
[Guest]: but I might be writing on other cricket also.
[Guest]: I might be doing YouTube videos on cricket in general
[Guest]: and where 80% of my viewers are boys, but in the background
[Guest]: there are projects running where I'm thinking
[Guest]: how can I make an impact on this game?
[Guest]: How can I help the Indian team win a World Cup?
[Guest]: How can I help the Indian domestic players get a better deal?
[Guest]: Those kind of things always occupy space in my mind
[Guest]: and they may not always find a creative outlet,
[Guest]: but there will be something or the other running.
[Guest]: And again, I'm very lucky to be able to make a living
[Guest]: from this kind of thinking, just thinking about the game
[Guest]: and trying to find solutions for it,
[Guest]: which I really appreciate and remind myself to be grateful for.
[Guest]: But that thinking process and that desire to fix the problems
[Guest]: that I see in women's cricket has not really gone away
[Guest]: and that's probably what is then driving
[Guest]: and expressing in different ways.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's talk about women's cricket.
[Amit Varma]: And I almost feel hesitant, you know,
[Amit Varma]: talking about women's cricket particularly
[Amit Varma]: because I don't want to slot you as someone
[Amit Varma]: who writes about women's cricket because like I said,
[Amit Varma]: I just love your writing.
[Amit Varma]: You're one of my favorite cricket writers.
[Amit Varma]: But women's cricket is simply one of those subjects
[Amit Varma]: which not enough people have that kind of depth of knowledge about
[Amit Varma]: or sort of talk about.
[Amit Varma]: You know, most Indians are kind of saturated
[Amit Varma]: with the regular men's cricket that happens out there,
[Amit Varma]: but know nothing about women's cricket per se.
[Amit Varma]: And you've written this wonderful report called An Equal Hue
[Amit Varma]: along with Karunya Keshav and the late Siddhant Patnaik.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of talk a little bit about that
[Amit Varma]: because I love reading that paper in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: it laid out in great detail across all these different categories,
[Amit Varma]: not just what is wrong with women's cricket,
[Amit Varma]: but what can be done to improve it.
[Amit Varma]: And just as a vision document and as a, you know,
[Amit Varma]: taking stock of where things are,
[Amit Varma]: I just found it eye-opening in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what it involved.
[Amit Varma]: Like, you know, why did you write that?
[Amit Varma]: What was the impetus behind it?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I know you were one of the, I think,
[Amit Varma]: three journalists present during the 2017 World Cup final.
[Amit Varma]: I think Karunya was also one of them.
[Amit Varma]: So what was the impetus which made you decide
[Amit Varma]: that this is something that needs to be done?
[Amit Varma]: Did you feel that there was a serious audience for it?
[Amit Varma]: Not audience in terms of eyeballs,
[Amit Varma]: but in terms of people who would act in the board,
[Amit Varma]: who would actually do something about it?
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about what led you to the report and so on.
[Guest]: So let me pick up on the fact that
[Guest]: the third journalist in that 2017 World Cup was Siddhant.
[Amit Varma]: Ah, so the three of you.
[Guest]: Yeah. So, and that was kind of where it started
[Guest]: because the two of them were working for Vision India at the time.
[Guest]: I was freelancing and the three of us
[Guest]: were the only ones who were traveling
[Guest]: to cover the World Cup in entirety.
[Guest]: Then after India reached the finals, a lot more media coverage swept in,
[Guest]: which was great.
[Guest]: But I must really mention here
[Guest]: the influence that Siddhant also had in this entire project.
[Guest]: That was the first time I actually spent time with him.
[Guest]: I'd met him once in the Vision India office,
[Guest]: but we were housemates on that tour.
[Guest]: So we had the same schedule.
[Guest]: So we basically had planned our accommodation
[Guest]: and our travel, etc. together.
[Guest]: And we chatted so much about women's cricket.
[Guest]: And of course, he was, I mean, not there just because
[Guest]: he was working with Vision India.
[Guest]: Even before that, in all his time,
[Guest]: he and Karun had put up a huge body of work
[Guest]: on women's cricket.
[Guest]: They were one of the few people who were writing about
[Guest]: domestic women's cricket, international women's cricket
[Guest]: before 2017.
[Guest]: Remember, 2017 is the moment where
[Guest]: women's cricket became cool again.
[Guest]: And I'm always going to have tremendous respect
[Guest]: for the people who were putting in a lot of work
[Guest]: behind the scenes before that.
[Guest]: And Siddhant was one of those people.
[Guest]: And he has a sister who, you know,
[Guest]: he saw a lot of similarities between her and me.
[Guest]: This sporty kid, always not afraid to play
[Guest]: with the boys, standing out.
[Guest]: And there was always this desire to kind of make
[Guest]: the world a better place for people like her.
[Guest]: And therefore, this kinship with the underdogs,
[Guest]: whether it's domestic men's cricketers
[Guest]: or women's international cricketers.
[Guest]: And so the loss of the 2017 World Cup final,
[Guest]: even for that final, the three of us were
[Guest]: sharing a house together in London.
[Guest]: And we kind of grieved it in that final
[Guest]: in our own ways.
[Guest]: I remember finishing my filing
[Guest]: at some ridiculous hour at night
[Guest]: and after that match, just collapsing
[Guest]: in the kitchen and crying.
[Guest]: I mean, that is the time where the emotion
[Guest]: finally came out that, you know,
[Guest]: we were so close and we lost by nine runs.
[Guest]: And after that, we kept talking,
[Guest]: especially Siddhant and me, about
[Guest]: what we can do to help the game,
[Guest]: what we can do to try and make it better.
[Guest]: So, I mean, for a start, we decided,
[Guest]: OK, let's compile our suggestions
[Guest]: for whatever it's worth.
[Guest]: And we made a very rough document
[Guest]: which had some excellent suggestions.
[Guest]: I mean, even Siddhant had really put in,
[Guest]: you know, he had event management background.
[Guest]: So use that kind of a background
[Guest]: to draw this up.
[Guest]: He happened to speak to Nandan Kamath,
[Guest]: who you've had on your pod before,
[Guest]: who has founded something called
[Guest]: the Sports Law and Policy Center,
[Guest]: which is a body which is dedicated
[Guest]: to kind of publishing these kind of works
[Guest]: which create almost a body of work
[Guest]: on that particular sport.
[Guest]: So Nandan really encouraged us
[Guest]: to widen and deepen the scope of the report
[Guest]: and make it, you know,
[Guest]: a basic groundwork document
[Guest]: where anyone who wants to have
[Guest]: any kind of influence in women's cricket
[Guest]: can read this, get an idea of where they are,
[Guest]: where the action areas are required.
[Guest]: And so we set about that.
[Guest]: During the course of making that report,
[Guest]: Siddhant's sickness got worse
[Guest]: and eventually he didn't survive.
[Guest]: After that, I asked Arunia to come on board
[Guest]: and the two of us kind of finished that work.
[Guest]: And during the course of the lockdown,
[Guest]: actually, when we both got a lot more time,
[Guest]: so a project that was kind of
[Guest]: in the making for three years,
[Guest]: put it together,
[Guest]: we based it not just on our own experience,
[Guest]: but a survey conducted of 350 state cricketers
[Guest]: who were really generous with our time.
[Guest]: Again, like the sense of community
[Guest]: within the women's cricket circuit
[Guest]: where they all volunteered to fill up the survey
[Guest]: because, again, there was a lot of goodwill
[Guest]: built up by Arunia and Siddhant also
[Guest]: in the process of writing their book.
[Guest]: So when they knew that they were involved in this,
[Guest]: a lot of cricketers participated very actively.
[Guest]: And this kind of then led us to
[Guest]: the Equal Hue Report,
[Guest]: which was published in 2020.
[Guest]: It is the groundwork for action
[Guest]: that needs to be taken next.
[Guest]: It's a document that analyzes
[Guest]: where the gap areas are.
[Guest]: It's the document that really says
[Guest]: that, you know, OK, if anyone,
[Guest]: whether it's the BCCI,
[Guest]: whether it's a broadcaster,
[Guest]: whether it's some NGO who wants to do good work,
[Guest]: or whether it's a corporate who has CSR funds,
[Guest]: they would like to use it to help women's cricket grow.
[Guest]: These are the areas where you can start.
[Guest]: This is the way where you can make an impact
[Guest]: through the recommendations that we've made.
[Guest]: Along the way, you know,
[Guest]: we've also had this sense of,
[Guest]: OK, now we've done this analysis,
[Guest]: now what?
[Guest]: And therefore, it's moved into action.
[Guest]: And we've formed, Karunia, myself,
[Guest]: people at the Sports Law Policy Center
[Guest]: have formed the Equal Hue Project
[Guest]: where we are trying to fill some of these gaps ourselves.
[Guest]: And a couple of the gaps that we identified were
[Guest]: not enough information about women's cricket, you know.
[Guest]: If a women's cricketer is sitting in
[Guest]: Cuttack, Bhubaneswar, Orissa or Dharamshala,
[Guest]: do they know the pathways in their state?
[Guest]: So, Karunia really headed a project
[Guest]: which compiled information for each state
[Guest]: of, you know, what the existing pathways in that state are,
[Guest]: how a woman who's interested in cricket
[Guest]: or a girl who's interested in cricket
[Guest]: can find cricket near her,
[Guest]: what the state association processes are,
[Guest]: what their phone numbers are,
[Guest]: wherever available,
[Guest]: whatever information is available
[Guest]: has been put together in a website,
[Guest]: on the Equal Hue website,
[Guest]: where, you know, we're aiming to fill up that information gap.
[Guest]: They also worked really hard on publishing an audiobook
[Guest]: where there's a women's cricketer
[Guest]: as a central figure in it
[Guest]: for 5 to 8-year-olds or 5 to 10-year-olds.
[Guest]: So, the next generation should grow up
[Guest]: with women's cricketers in their consciousness.
[Guest]: So, that's some of the projects
[Guest]: that the Equal Hue Project is working on.
[Guest]: Like I said, there are projects in the background
[Guest]: that we are working on.
[Guest]: We have plans and we are reaching out
[Guest]: to various brands to partner with them
[Guest]: on these plans to just support the ecosystem
[Guest]: more and more,
[Guest]: be it through scholarships,
[Guest]: be it through tournaments.
[Guest]: And that's, I think, the big opportunity
[Guest]: and something that I hope really allows us
[Guest]: to make an actual impact on the ground
[Guest]: because there's only so much you can do
[Guest]: is what I've discovered writing about a sport.
[Guest]: But, you know, can we actually make an impact
[Guest]: on the ground through our projects?
[Guest]: That's the new focus almost.
[Amit Varma]: You know, the hope has been voiced by many
[Amit Varma]: that the 2017 World Cup final
[Amit Varma]: with all the viewership that it got and so on,
[Amit Varma]: the World Cup, in fact, not just the final,
[Amit Varma]: with all the viewership that it got
[Amit Varma]: could be something like the 1983 moment
[Amit Varma]: for men's cricket was.
[Amit Varma]: But my question is, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I think in the life of any sport or any activity,
[Amit Varma]: there is this transition from where early on
[Amit Varma]: all the people who care about it deeply
[Amit Varma]: and are making initiatives are people
[Amit Varma]: who are just passionate about it
[Amit Varma]: and are motivated by that passion
[Amit Varma]: and that's what's driving them.
[Amit Varma]: And then the next phase that comes
[Amit Varma]: is when it crosses a certain tipping point
[Amit Varma]: and people are instead motivated by commerce.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so people begin to do things
[Amit Varma]: for women's cricket
[Amit Varma]: because they feel there is a market for it
[Amit Varma]: and then things really improve,
[Amit Varma]: then infrastructure improves,
[Amit Varma]: then all of these things, you know,
[Amit Varma]: like you've got a section
[Amit Varma]: where you speak about barriers to participation
[Amit Varma]: which include cultural barriers,
[Amit Varma]: physical barriers, financial barriers,
[Amit Varma]: then those start to disappear.
[Amit Varma]: You've got a section where you talk about
[Amit Varma]: domestic cricket and the grassroots
[Amit Varma]: and how the ecosystem there can be much better
[Amit Varma]: and those kind of start to vanish.
[Amit Varma]: So how close is that point?
[Amit Varma]: Have we reached that point?
[Amit Varma]: Have we crossed that point?
[Amit Varma]: Is it still somewhere in the future?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a sense of how the game
[Amit Varma]: is sort of evolving in that sense
[Amit Varma]: because it is true that women's cricket
[Amit Varma]: is much more in the consciousness
[Amit Varma]: of a lot of viewers,
[Amit Varma]: but is there enough women's cricket happening?
[Amit Varma]: Are they watching it actively?
[Amit Varma]: What's the ecosystem like beneath the elite game?
[Amit Varma]: Give me a little bit of a sense of that.
[Guest]: So let me answer the
[Guest]: driven by commerce kind of angle first.
[Guest]: The last IPL T20 women's challenge that happened
[Guest]: where it involved three teams
[Guest]: was held in Dubai alongside the men's IPL of 2020.
[Guest]: It was the first tournament to attract sponsors.
[Guest]: It was the first tournament where Jio came on board
[Guest]: as an independent title sponsor.
[Guest]: It was very prudent and smart of the BCCI
[Guest]: to not just piggyback it along with the men's tournament
[Guest]: and the men's sponsors and identify it
[Guest]: as a separate property and see what value
[Guest]: there is for this property.
[Guest]: Jio came on board as a title sponsor
[Guest]: and then all the IPL supporting sponsors
[Guest]: came on board for this women's T20 challenge as well.
[Guest]: Wonderful opportunity for you to get branding.
[Guest]: Wonderful opportunity for you to get exposure
[Guest]: and what the BCCI treasurer I believe said after the tournament
[Guest]: is this is now financially sustainable
[Guest]: which I take to understand that it paid for itself.
[Guest]: We've broken even.
[Guest]: So if that is the bare minimum of where we are,
[Guest]: it's a wonderful starting point to be
[Guest]: because you can just everything north of this is profit.
[Guest]: So I think commerce wise that is where
[Guest]: the Indian team is value wise when right now
[Guest]: it's hard to define a separate value
[Guest]: for the Indian women's cricket team because
[Guest]: how do you define value of a sports property?
[Guest]: Broadcast rights.
[Guest]: What kind of money is being paid by broadcasters
[Guest]: to showcase this property which reflects
[Guest]: how many advertisers are willing to put money
[Guest]: behind this kind of a product.
[Guest]: It's hard to gauge right now because
[Guest]: women's domestic women's international matches
[Guest]: are bundled in to the men's broadcast rights
[Guest]: along with you know, the under 19 World Cup
[Guest]: or those under 19 teams same with the shirt sponsorship.
[Guest]: The shirt sponsorship is sold as a bundle
[Guest]: for the men's women's and under 19.
[Guest]: Whereas I think now in the next cycle
[Guest]: which is 2023 onwards.
[Guest]: There is a case.
[Guest]: There is a strong case to separate this
[Guest]: as a separate property.
[Guest]: Let's say women's cricket is sold at a separate property.
[Guest]: It will earn you.
[Guest]: I mean by separating women's cricket
[Guest]: the overall cost of the men's rights
[Guest]: is not going to come down.
[Guest]: Yeah, but the but the women's rights
[Guest]: might earn you, you know, some amount of money.
[Guest]: It's not going to be in the range of what the men
[Guest]: men's rights are going to earn you,
[Guest]: but it will earn you some amount of money
[Guest]: that will put a number on the value of women's cricket
[Guest]: and that is something I look forward to happening.
[Guest]: There's also the fact that if you look at
[Guest]: a women's cricket broadcast now,
[Guest]: for example, on these OTT apps,
[Guest]: you can you can gauge that by how many of these
[Guest]: how many ads are off the OTT platform itself.
[Guest]: For example, if it's a on Hotstar in the breaks,
[Guest]: how many Hotstar ads are you seeing?
[Guest]: Because that is time where they haven't been able
[Guest]: to sell it to an advertiser.
[Guest]: So they put a Hotstar ad there.
[Guest]: So if you see a lot of Hotstar ads,
[Guest]: it means that this property is not really valuable.
[Guest]: What I've seen is of the recent tour to Australia.
[Guest]: There were a lot of ads for the women's tour to Australia.
[Guest]: There were ads by brands,
[Guest]: very few ads by the broadcaster who was Sony.
[Guest]: There was also title sponsors for the series.
[Guest]: There was also investment by the broadcaster
[Guest]: in building up this is for away series.
[Guest]: Hindi, Tamil, Telugu, three separate languages
[Guest]: for broadcast for the women's series
[Guest]: beyond just the world feed English commentary
[Guest]: that they carry, which tells me that's where you
[Guest]: that's where they stand in terms of commerce
[Guest]: in terms of the underlying structure.
[Guest]: So much that could be better.
[Guest]: I mean, we talk about the strength of domestic cricket
[Guest]: for the men and the finishing school
[Guest]: that is the IPL and the India A programs
[Guest]: a long time ago for the men's in men's cricket.
[Guest]: We used to compare Australia as a better domestic system.
[Guest]: Why? Because they have only eight teams,
[Guest]: whereas we have some 30-35 teams
[Guest]: and we are diluting our talent.
[Guest]: Therefore, the competition is less fierce.
[Guest]: Therefore, the players are not battle hardened
[Guest]: when they come to international cricket.
[Guest]: What has changed?
[Guest]: I mean, we still have 30-35 teams,
[Guest]: but now we have an India A program.
[Guest]: Now we have an IPL.
[Guest]: Those are the steps up.
[Guest]: So, I mean, for me, it's just common sense to say
[Guest]: that, you know, apply the same model here.
[Guest]: We have 30-35 teams playing domestic cricket.
[Guest]: Please have an India A program.
[Guest]: Please have an under-19 program.
[Guest]: Please have a women's IPL and just see how,
[Guest]: you know, other countries are scared of India getting it right
[Guest]: because of just the sheer number of players that we have,
[Guest]: even despite, you know, not really trying.
[Guest]: A few moves which have bewildered me
[Guest]: in the last few years have been
[Guest]: the removal of the interzonal tournament.
[Guest]: So, from these 30-35 teams,
[Guest]: you're picking talent directly,
[Guest]: putting it in the challenger trophy
[Guest]: and sending it to international level.
[Guest]: Of course, they're going to find that jump slightly difficult.
[Guest]: The interzonal level was what gave them
[Guest]: a little bit of a stepping stone.
[Guest]: I would love to see that tournament come back
[Guest]: besides the fact that it just gives more match days
[Guest]: to the players.
[Guest]: Again, they play too few matches.
[Guest]: Spend nine months of the year training
[Guest]: and play about four or five matches ODI,
[Guest]: four or five matches T20.
[Guest]: If you don't qualify for the next stage,
[Guest]: that's it. Domestic season over
[Guest]: in senior cricket.
[Guest]: And what was your other question about the underlying structure or...
[Amit Varma]: I'll come back to that just to follow on sort of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, what you said obviously makes sense
[Amit Varma]: that if you unbundle the rights,
[Amit Varma]: you get a proper picture of where
[Amit Varma]: women's cricket really stands.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the risk of underestimating it
[Amit Varma]: is no longer there.
[Amit Varma]: You know, is it then a problem that BCCI
[Amit Varma]: is running both aspects of the game?
[Amit Varma]: Because obviously, I'm, you know,
[Amit Varma]: both men's cricket and women's cricket
[Amit Varma]: because I get it that in 2006,
[Amit Varma]: with all the resources,
[Amit Varma]: they improved a lot of things.
[Amit Varma]: They can't take a lot of the abundant money
[Amit Varma]: from the men's game and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: use it to give the women's game a leg up.
[Amit Varma]: But if I just think of incentives within the BCCI,
[Amit Varma]: their huge cash cow is the men's game.
[Amit Varma]: All their thinking, all their organizational work,
[Amit Varma]: it's natural for it to kind of go there.
[Amit Varma]: So was it perhaps better earlier
[Amit Varma]: in just in terms of incentives
[Amit Varma]: that if you have a body where, you know,
[Amit Varma]: your job is women's cricket, it's nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: That's all you do.
[Amit Varma]: That's your incentives.
[Amit Varma]: That's how you will be judged.
[Amit Varma]: It's a separate product.
[Amit Varma]: It's a separate property, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So do you see that as a structural flaw?
[Amit Varma]: Does the BCCI really take women's cricket that seriously?
[Amit Varma]: What's your sense?
[Guest]: This is an interesting line of thinking
[Guest]: and it's something that the cricket historian
[Guest]: in the UK, Raf Nicholson, has researched quite a bit.
[Guest]: She's actually, I think, doing something close to a thesis
[Guest]: on how women's sport has fared
[Guest]: after it kind of got absorbed by the ruling
[Guest]: existing men's body.
[Guest]: And like I've said, there are a lot of things
[Guest]: that, you know, change for the better
[Guest]: and there are some things that change for the worse.
[Guest]: In terms of incentives, if you really go that cold,
[Guest]: I'm trying to put my passion for women's cricket aside.
[Guest]: Think about it in terms of a commercial property.
[Guest]: Think about it in terms of, you know,
[Guest]: can this earn me revenue?
[Guest]: Is it worth putting in X amount of money
[Guest]: and will I get greater than X back?
[Guest]: Initially, no.
[Guest]: Initially, it's going to be something that requires
[Guest]: a lot of investment of time and money to grow.
[Guest]: But the potential of women's cricket as a property,
[Guest]: I think, is something that people are missing
[Guest]: and you have to kind of think about it
[Guest]: in terms of doubling your base
[Guest]: rather than, you know, draining your resources.
[Guest]: So if one thinks about it like that,
[Guest]: we've seen how women's sport has just grown
[Guest]: into its own cash-generating,
[Guest]: revenue-generating property in other sports.
[Guest]: We've seen the success of the women's Big Bash League.
[Guest]: We've seen the popularity of the US
[Guest]: national women's football team.
[Guest]: We've seen PV Sindhu as, you know,
[Guest]: a female sport icon, although team sport,
[Guest]: I'll probably, should probably take more examples
[Guest]: from team sport.
[Guest]: But there is enough to suggest,
[Guest]: like we saw with the IPL,
[Guest]: where sponsors came on for just,
[Guest]: which essentially exhibition matches.
[Guest]: There is enough to suggest that there is value
[Guest]: in putting in this investment for 4 or 5 years.
[Guest]: There are incentives to put in that investment
[Guest]: for 4 or 5 years.
[Guest]: Think about it from an IPL team.
[Guest]: Okay, suppose an IPL team wants to,
[Guest]: or, you know, what are the incentives
[Guest]: for an IPL team to start a women's cricket team?
[Guest]: One is that IPL is only a 2-month-a-year property.
[Guest]: If you can double that for a small investment,
[Guest]: getting involved with a women's IPL
[Guest]: will require a smaller investment
[Guest]: than it was for a men's investment.
[Guest]: You're doubling your branding suddenly
[Guest]: because if you have a women's IPL,
[Guest]: even if it's a 1-month tournament
[Guest]: separate from the men's IPL window,
[Guest]: suddenly from 2 months of visibility,
[Guest]: you've got 3 months of visibility.
[Guest]: I think those are the incentives that exist
[Guest]: if you choose to see them,
[Guest]: if you choose to look at them that way.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, I completely agree with you
[Amit Varma]: that women's cricket in the long run
[Amit Varma]: is an enticing commercial prospect as well.
[Amit Varma]: The worry just is that,
[Amit Varma]: from the BCCI's point of view,
[Amit Varma]: the whole focus will be men's cricket, IPL.
[Amit Varma]: There's just so much money there
[Amit Varma]: that they may not bother about this per se.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas, you know, that's kind of the worry.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of final questions.
[Amit Varma]: I know I've kept you talking for a long time.
[Amit Varma]: A couple of sort of final questions.
[Amit Varma]: One of the subjects on which you've written and spoken passionately
[Amit Varma]: is the need for a women's IPL.
[Amit Varma]: Elaborate on this a bit because,
[Amit Varma]: for me, when the men's IPL happened,
[Amit Varma]: and I remember there were critics of it before it started,
[Amit Varma]: and I wrote a long piece in Crick Info,
[Amit Varma]: kind of talking about the wonders it would do,
[Amit Varma]: and even I underestimated them.
[Amit Varma]: But the wonders were not just in a commercial sense.
[Amit Varma]: I just felt that culturally it would have a big impact
[Amit Varma]: in terms of giving many more players a livelihood,
[Amit Varma]: making the field much more competitive
[Amit Varma]: where you don't have the monopsony of the BCCI
[Amit Varma]: as the only buyer for your services.
[Amit Varma]: Within this artificial environment,
[Amit Varma]: you have eight people competing to get talented cricketers,
[Amit Varma]: to build talented cricketers.
[Amit Varma]: You know, instead of 10 people making a living from the game,
[Amit Varma]: you have 100 people making that kind of living from the game.
[Amit Varma]: So it just culturally, it kind of changed everything.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me about what, you know, your case for a women's IPL.
[Amit Varma]: Do you see a similar sort of thing happening
[Amit Varma]: if it's just allowed to exist?
[Amit Varma]: Because like I said, it would take a fraction
[Amit Varma]: of the investment of the male IPL
[Amit Varma]: and I'm pretty sure people would tune in.
[Guest]: So just to finish off one point on the previous question,
[Guest]: is that, you know, if the BCCI can almost have
[Guest]: a focus completely on men's cricket,
[Guest]: it's not outlandish to for them, you know,
[Guest]: build up a dedicated women's cricket section
[Guest]: and give them a budget and say,
[Guest]: okay, we're not going to pay attention to you at all,
[Guest]: you can do whatever you want,
[Guest]: which would almost kind of be an ideal case scenario
[Guest]: for many fans of women's cricket where, you know,
[Guest]: you have a decision maker with some actual power
[Guest]: using a budget given by the BCCI,
[Guest]: which is kind of the best of both worlds.
[Guest]: To come to the IPL question,
[Guest]: many ways in which I think about a successful sports team
[Guest]: is their value in terms of the broadcast market.
[Guest]: What makes a successful sports team valuable?
[Guest]: What made the Indian women's cricket team
[Guest]: suddenly a subject of interest and therefore a subject of commerce
[Guest]: is that performance in a World Cup.
[Guest]: Again, they kind of acted up with a performance
[Guest]: where they reached the final of the 2020 World Cup
[Guest]: and it must be acknowledged that
[Guest]: when Australia established that record of 86,174 people
[Guest]: in the MCG for a women's cricket final,
[Guest]: a big part of that, well, a part of that for sure
[Guest]: is the fact that India were their opposition.
[Guest]: If New Zealand were their opposition,
[Guest]: would they have pulled in so many people? I'm not sure.
[Guest]: So, which tells you that this Indian team,
[Guest]: if it does well at a World Cup,
[Guest]: becomes a big property, becomes a big financial property for you.
[Guest]: Now, what will help the Indian team win a World Cup?
[Guest]: We've seen the effect with the men's IPL
[Guest]: on how it's impacted the performance,
[Guest]: the international performances of the Indian team.
[Guest]: That is one of the cases, that is one of the strongest cases
[Guest]: for creating a women's IPL because it will help you win a World Cup.
[Guest]: So, you're creating these other,
[Guest]: maybe, you know, you're creating these other eight players in the system
[Guest]: but it's going to help the big player get even stronger.
[Guest]: One of the biggest cases where the incentives are just aligned
[Guest]: to really make this absolutely happen,
[Guest]: make it grow as fast as possible and make it the number one women's league in the world.
[Guest]: The other impacts of the IPL, like we've seen,
[Guest]: are really the human stories that come out of the men's IPL.
[Guest]: Where you have someone like a Varun Chakravarthy,
[Guest]: almost given up cricket, working as an architect,
[Guest]: now IPL star, Indian team player.
[Guest]: Within the Indian team itself, you have so many of those stories.
[Guest]: You have Shikha Pandey, Air Force officer and Indian cricketer.
[Guest]: You have someone like a Radha Yadav,
[Guest]: whose father was a vegetable seller on literally like a footpath in Mumbai.
[Guest]: And now, you know, through the money that she's earned for the Indian team,
[Guest]: they're able to afford a flat in Mumbai.
[Guest]: Those kind of stories and the potential for those stories to effect actual social change.
[Guest]: Because you are talking about women in India.
[Guest]: You are talking about a group which has its own challenges,
[Guest]: own social restrictions or own social obstacles.
[Guest]: And we've seen that.
[Guest]: I mean, this is a concept that my brothers and I talk about.
[Guest]: It's very often in a lifetime hard to jump up one's socioeconomic class.
[Guest]: The class that you are almost born into.
[Guest]: Cricket is a vehicle that allows that.
[Guest]: Cricket is a vehicle that allows you,
[Guest]: because of the popularity in the country
[Guest]: and because of the money associated with the IPL, it allows that.
[Guest]: And I want to hear more stories like that.
[Guest]: I mean, that's my case for a women's IPL.
[Guest]: I want to hear more stories where Shafali Verma was able to pay for her father
[Guest]: to fly out of the country for the first time.
[Guest]: He is seeing suddenly the world in a whole new light.
[Guest]: That entire generation is just exposed to something completely different
[Guest]: because of what she's done.
[Guest]: That's the social change that I want to be effected through a women's IPL.
[Amit Varma]: Final question.
[Amit Varma]: You know, one way of kind of transforming women's cricket
[Amit Varma]: is through top-down action of the kind we've been mentioning,
[Amit Varma]: that the BCCI get its act together.
[Amit Varma]: And even if they have a separate department,
[Amit Varma]: I think it's kind of a little bit of luck that who will they have in charge there.
[Amit Varma]: Will it be a politician or will it be someone from within the game
[Amit Varma]: who really cares about it, which is kind of uncontrollable.
[Amit Varma]: But I totally get it.
[Amit Varma]: But one of the ways of driving that change is from the top-down.
[Amit Varma]: The BCCI does things.
[Amit Varma]: They put India A, all of that into place, all of that happens.
[Amit Varma]: But the other is also from the bottom-up,
[Amit Varma]: where there is a passion for the game that is coming from the grassroots.
[Amit Varma]: More people are playing it and supply eventually meets that demand.
[Amit Varma]: Now, clearly that wasn't the case,
[Amit Varma]: say, even when you took up cricket,
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that you point out about how so much of it is kind of happenstance,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, Shubhangi Kulkarni, Dana Edulji,
[Amit Varma]: all the pieces kind of falling into place that took you wherever.
[Amit Varma]: But cultural barriers, physical barriers,
[Amit Varma]: like you talk in that report about how you didn't have changing rooms.
[Amit Varma]: So after a, you know, gruelling session,
[Amit Varma]: all the boys would just change their T-shirt and go home
[Amit Varma]: and you'd be all sweaty and, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you'd put on a jumper over what you were wearing
[Amit Varma]: because you didn't want people in the local train to have to tolerate your sweat.
[Amit Varma]: But now with the kind of the changing profile,
[Amit Varma]: with the fact that people don't need to physically meet a Shubhangi Kulkarni
[Amit Varma]: when they can watch a Snehal Pradhan video on YouTube and get inspired by that.
[Amit Varma]: Or they can even watch, like there's a charming talk show
[Amit Varma]: that Smriti Mandana and I think Jemima Rodrigues too, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and they can watch that and make them role models.
[Amit Varma]: So do you feel that in terms of bottoms up,
[Amit Varma]: something happening there,
[Amit Varma]: that at least there things are changing,
[Amit Varma]: that happenstance of that sort will no longer be so rare,
[Amit Varma]: will no longer be so necessary?
[Amit Varma]: And just people's approaches, you know,
[Amit Varma]: whereas earlier parents who loved cricket
[Amit Varma]: and wanted to live vicariously through their kids
[Amit Varma]: might have sent their son to a coaching camp.
[Amit Varma]: Today they'll send their daughter to a coaching camp.
[Amit Varma]: So what's your sense of the change actually happening
[Amit Varma]: in our society in that context?
[Guest]: That's a really good question.
[Guest]: It's probably one that I haven't really thought about before.
[Guest]: But just thinking about it right now,
[Guest]: I think about it about how it exists in men's cricket
[Guest]: because that is what the situation is in men's cricket
[Guest]: where the demand is just so much that supply arises.
[Guest]: Then, you know, there are tennis ball tournaments
[Guest]: organized at every little open space you can find
[Guest]: because there are people playing tennis ball cricket there
[Guest]: who say, let's make a tournament.
[Guest]: So can we get to that point?
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, in theory, yes,
[Guest]: it will take a long time for bottom up change to happen.
[Guest]: It will probably take an event like how it did for India.
[Guest]: If you think about, you know,
[Guest]: how men's cricket's current situation has developed,
[Guest]: it's been slow cooked for 30 years.
[Guest]: It's been slow cooked since 1983
[Guest]: throughout the entire generation of Sachin Tendulkar worship.
[Guest]: Now into the generation of, you know,
[Guest]: a team that can go abroad and win.
[Guest]: That's the kind of time I'm talking about that it will take.
[Guest]: You never know, you know, there might be an incredible event.
[Guest]: We, you know, we underestimate these kind of things.
[Guest]: There might be an incredible event in women's cricket
[Guest]: which just drives that almost overnight,
[Guest]: you know, relatively speaking overnight.
[Guest]: And then you might have, like you said,
[Guest]: supply suddenly turning up because there is so much demand.
[Guest]: I feel there is definitely a shift in terms of
[Guest]: how the likes of Smriti Mandhana are such popular figures nowadays
[Guest]: and the influence that they're having on the next generation
[Guest]: is probably something we'll only understand once the generation grows up.
[Guest]: So it's definitely possible.
[Guest]: There are so many more ways for people to get into coaching, etc.
[Guest]: and start on their first few steps of the journey.
[Guest]: But the next few steps are still held by these institutions
[Guest]: and therefore you might have more,
[Guest]: the base of the pyramid does get wider,
[Guest]: but then to move up the pyramid,
[Guest]: you do have to move to a few fixed ladders.
[Guest]: And that's where I'm a little worried,
[Guest]: a little cynical about this
[Guest]: because we've already seen this since the 2017 World Cup,
[Guest]: cricket academies everywhere.
[Guest]: I mean, just after the 2017 World Cup,
[Guest]: so many girls turned up at cricket academies,
[Guest]: but they don't yet have that many tournaments
[Guest]: to really fill their appetite.
[Guest]: And that's, I mean, thinking back to your conversation with Nandan and Joy,
[Guest]: I think Nandan was also talking about
[Guest]: just creating these tournaments
[Guest]: and how that really changes the ecosystem
[Guest]: just by virtue of having more opportunities to play.
[Guest]: I think that is where the demand already exists
[Guest]: and the supply needs to step up.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I guess it's a bit of a chicken and egg thing
[Amit Varma]: where the demand exists,
[Amit Varma]: but it can't express itself in any particular way
[Amit Varma]: because there's no supply.
[Amit Varma]: If you had tournaments,
[Amit Varma]: you would know how many people are really interested.
[Amit Varma]: So I guess at some point,
[Amit Varma]: it's up to creative entrepreneurs
[Amit Varma]: and passionate crusaders like yourself
[Amit Varma]: to kind of change that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, thanks a lot for giving me so much time on the show.
[Amit Varma]: I'm really looking forward
[Amit Varma]: not just to what happens in women's cricket,
[Amit Varma]: but also your journey as a creator,
[Amit Varma]: which is, I think, just so inspiring
[Amit Varma]: in terms of the kind of output you put out.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm going to go and watch that video again
[Amit Varma]: to kind of hit myself with it
[Amit Varma]: and say, look how much she does in a day, you fool.
[Amit Varma]: What are you doing?
[Amit Varma]: So thanks so much, Snehal.
[Guest]: It's been my pleasure, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode,
[Amit Varma]: hop on over to The Show Notes.
[Amit Varma]: I've linked Snehal's newsletter and YouTube channels there.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, there are many other links to enter Rabbit Holes through.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Snehal on Twitter at Snehal Pradhan.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen
[Amit Varma]: at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.